

    The world is falling short on its promise of universal health coverage by 2030
   

      Universal health coverage means that all people have access to the health services they need  when and where they need them  without financial hardship. It includes the full range of essential health services  from health promotion to prevention  treatment  rehabilitation and palliative care. The number of people covered by essential health services in 2017 was estimated to be between 2.5 billion and 3.7 billion  about one third to one half of the global population. Only 12 to 27 per cent of the population in low-income countries were fully covered that year. If current trends continue  only 39 to 63 per cent of the global population will be covered by such services by 2030.
    

      The COVID-19 crisis is disrupting essential health services around the world. Some services have been suspended to free up resources for COVID-19 patients and to reduce the risk of transmission. Demand for some critical services has been reduced as patients seek to lighten the burden on hospitals and other health facilities. If universal health coverage is to become a reality by 2030  growth in the provision and use of essential health services must greatly accelerate.
    

      Rising out-of-pocket health expenses are reaching unsustainable levels  pushing millions into extreme poverty
    

       Achieving universal health coverage remains a global challenge. The number of people incurring large out-of-pocket health expenses has been increasing and will likely continue to increase. Globally  the proportion of the population spending more than 10 per cent of their household budgets to pay for health services rose from 9.4 per cent to 12.7 per cent (927 million people) between 2000 and 2015. It is estimated that nearly 90 million people were pushed into extreme poverty by out-of-pocket health payments in 2015. An estimated 1 billion people will spend at least 10 per cent of their household budgets on health care in 2020  the majority in lower-middle-income countries. The income loss due to COVID-19 lockdown measures will likely exacerbate the situation.

         Official development assistance (ODA) plays a vital role in funding health care and medical research and in supporting national responses to COVID-19. But while ODA for basic health from all donors increased by 41 per cent in real terms since 2010  reaching $10 billion in 2018  progress has stalled in recent years.
       
