

    COVID-19 is amplifying health inequalities
   

       COVID-19 disproportionately affects the elderly  the poor  refugees and migrants  and a broad range of vulnerable groups due to their specific health and socioeconomic circumstances  poor living conditions and lack of access to high-quality public health care. Moreover  the collateral effects of the pandemic resulting from the global economic downturn  social isolation and movement restrictions inequitably affect those who are already marginalized.
Older persons: Available age-disaggregated national data showed that people aged 65 and over comprised close to 80 per cent of all COVID-19 deaths  even though only 14 per cent of confirmed COVID-19 cases were for that age group.
       

          Distribution of reported COVID-19 cases and deaths by age  January 2020 through April 2021 (percentage)
        
Show Data
Download to CSV
The poor: Prior to the pandemic  an estimated 927 million people  or 12.7 per cent of the global population  made out-of-pocket health-care payments representing more than 10 per cent of their household budgets. This pushed almost 90 million people below the extreme poverty line. With increasing poverty due to the pandemic  out-of-pocket health spending will likely pose an even greater threat to the poor than spending on other essentials  such as food and education.
Refugees and migrants: The pandemic has worsened already-distressed living and health conditions of refugees and migrants. Around 5 per cent of survey respondents did not seek health care even when they had COVID-19 symptoms. The main reasons cited were inadequate financial resources  fear of deportation  and lack of health care or no entitlement to such care.
People living in developing regions: Equitable access to vaccines  with a focus on protecting priority populations  including health workers and those most at risk  is one of the most important measures that could be taken to mitigate health and economic impacts and bring the pandemic under control. As of 17 June 2021  close to 2.4 billion COVID-19 vaccine doses had been administered globally. Vast inequities exist in distribution  however: for every 100 people  around 68 vaccines were administered in Europe and Northern America  compared with fewer than 2 in sub-Saharan Africa.

          Number of COVID-19 vaccines administered per 100 people  as of 17 June 2021
        
*Excluding Australia and New Zealand.
Show Data
Download to CSV
