
SDG Goals
 
 
Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls

             UNICEF/Chulho Hyun
        
 The world is a better place for women today than it was in the past. Fewer girls are forced into early marriage; more women are serving in parliament and positions of leadership; and laws are being reformed to advance gender equality. Despite these gains  discriminatory laws and social norms remain pervasive  along with harmful practices and other forms of violence against women and girls. Women continue to be underrepresented at all levels of political leadership. Across the globe  women and girls perform a disproportionate share of unpaid domestic work. Moreover  they continue to face barriers with respect to their sexual and reproductive health and rights  including legal restrictions and lack of autonomy in decision-making. Among the most disadvantaged are women and girls who face the compounded effects of gender and other forms of discrimination. Achieving gender equality will require bold and sustainable actions that address the structural impediments and root causes of discrimination against women. Equally important  it will require laws and policies that advance gender equality  backed by adequate resources  as well as stronger accountability for commitments made to women's rights.

Women and girls continue to be subjected to harmful practices that profoundly affect their lives
 Women and girls around the world continue to experience violence and cruel practices that strip them of their dignity and erode their well-being. Intimate partner violence affects women of all ages and ethnicities  regardless of their socioeconomic status and educational level  in all countries. According to the latest available data from 106 countries  18 per cent of ever-partnered women and girls 15 to 49 years old experienced physical and/or sexual violence by a current or former intimate partner in the 12 months prior to the survey. 
 Female genital mutilation (FGM) is a deeply troubling human-rights violation that affects at least 200 million women in the 30 countries where the practice is concentrated (half of them in West Africa). On average  the prevalence of FGM has declined by one quarter since around 2000. Still  on average  about one in three girls 15 to 19 years old in those countries have been subjected to FGM  compared to nearly one in two in 2000.
 Child marriageanother harmful practicehas continued to decline around the world  largely driven by progress in Southern Asia. There  a girls risk of marrying in childhood has decreased by over 40 per cent since 2000. Increasingly  the global burden of child marriage is shifting from Southern Asia to sub-Saharan Africa  where levels of child marriage have declined at a more modest rate.
Proportion of ever-partnered women and girls aged 15 to 49 years subjected to physical and/or sexual violence by a current or former intimate partner in the previous 12 months  latest available data  20052017 (percentage)
Note: Only regions where available data cover at least 50 per cent of the population are displayed in this figure.
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Women and girls perform a disproportionate share of unpaid care and domestic work
 On average  women spend roughly triple the amount of time that men do each day in unpaid care and domestic work  according to the latest available data from around 90 countries. That work includes a variety of unpaid activities  such as taking care of children and the elderly  and domestic chores. Data also suggest that the gender gap widens when women are most likely to have young children at home. 
 Inadequate cookstoves  water  sanitation and transportation increase womens burdens  as do the lack of early childhood education and care  long-term care and access to social protection and services. That burden is compounded by traditional notions of womens roles in society. When women are engaged in caregiving and domestic chores  they have less time for paid work  education and leisure  further reinforcing their socioeconomic disadvantage. 

  At home  at work and in political life  women are too often denied decision-making power
 As of 1 January 2019  womens representation in national parliaments ranged from 0 to 61.3 per cent  averaging 24.3 per cent. This is an increase of 5 percentage points since 2010. In 103 countries and areas with relevant data  womens representation in elected local deliberative bodies varied from less than 1 per cent to close to parity  at 50 per cent  with a median of 26 per cent. Womens representation in local government is 40 per cent or higher in only 15 countries and areas. When legislated gender quotas are adopted  significantly higher proportions of women are elected at both national and local levels. Countries with higher representation of women in local government tend to have higher representation in parliament. 
 In the economic sphere  the world has seen an upward trend in the proportion of women in managerial positions. Since 2000  that share has increased in all regions and country groupings  except in least developed countries. However  it remains disproportionately low. Women comprised 39 per cent of the workforce in 2018  but held only 27 per cent of managerial positions.
 That lack of decision-making power is reflected in the home as well. According to data from 51 countries  only 57 per cent of women 15 to 49 years old who are married or in a union make their own decisions about sexual relations and the use of contraceptives and reproductive health services. Womens and girls capacity to make those crucial decisions for themselvesand to be able to act on themis essential to their empowerment and the full exercise of their reproductive rights. 
Proportion of women in managerial positions  2018 (percentage)
* Excluding Australia and New Zealand.
Show Data
Download to CSV

  In too many countries  gaps in legal frameworks are failing to protect womens rights
 Over the past 25 years  progress has been made in gender equality through the creation of new legislation and the reform of existing laws. Still  troublesome gaps remain. This was the conclusion of a study of data collected in 2018 and covering four areas of law in 53 countries. In almost one third of the countries studied  gaps were found in overarching legal frameworks and areas of public life. For example  nearly two thirds of those countries lacked laws that covered both direct and indirect discrimination against women. In the area of violence against women  legal gaps were found in over one quarter of the countries studied. Of those countries  68 per cent lacked rape laws based on the principle of consent. In the areas of employment and economic benefits  and of marriage and family  29 per cent and 24 per cent of countries  respectively  had legal gaps. For example  in more than half of the countries  no laws were in place to mandate equal pay for work of equal value. Less than one third of the countries had laws stipulating 18 years as the minimum age of marriage for women and men  with no exceptions. 

 Financing gaps limit implementation of laws and policies on gender equality
 Gender budgeting aims to link policy and legal requirements for gender equality with resource allocation. Although progress has been made in implementing gender budgeting globally  significant gaps remain. For example  many countries have yet to establish a comprehensive system to track allocations for gender equality and to make data publicly available. An analysis of 2018 data from 69 countries and areas found that 13 countries (19 per cent) fully met those criteria  and 41 countries (59 per cent) approached the requirements. More often  countries issue directives on gender budgeting  use sex-disaggregated data to inform budget decisions  and conduct ex-post-impact assessments. The data also revealed a gap in policy implementation. Among the same set of countries  90 per cent had policies and programmes in place to address gender gaps  but only 43 per cent reported adequate resource allocations to implement them. 
Proportion of countries with systems to track gender equality budgeting allocations  by level of compliance  2018 (percentage)
* Excluding Australia and New Zealand.
          Note: Numbers in parentheses reflect the number of countries for which data are available.
Show Data
Download to CSV
 Goal 4
  

    Goal 6  
