

    Effective policymaking to achieve gender equality demands broad political participation. Yet womens representation in single or lower houses of parliament in countries around the world was only 23.4 per cent in 2017  just 10 percentage points higher than in 2000.

    Even in the two regions most advanced in terms of womens representationAustralia and New Zealand and Latin America and the Caribbeanwomen occupy fewer than one out of three seats in parliament. Northern Africa and Western Asia has made impressive advances: the proportion of seats held by women rose nearly fourfold between 2000 and 2017. Nevertheless  women still hold fewer than one in five parliamentary seats in the region.

    Slow progress suggests that stronger political will and more ambitious measures are needed. Quotas to boost womens political participation and empowerment have been helpful: 75 out of 190 countries (39 per cent) have used some form of quota system to increase womens representation  and election results in 2016 show that the strategy is working. However  quotas may also impose a false ceiling on womens representation; they therefore need to be periodically reviewed and updated to ensure continued progress.

    Women are also underrepresented in managerial positions  especially in senior and middle management. In most of the 67 countries with data from 2009 to 2015  less than a third of senior- and middle-management positions were held by women. Modest improvements can be observed in some countries. Over the past decade  the share of women in senior and middle management increased in about half of the countries with available data. However  the proportion of women in these positions remains significantly lower than the share of women in total employment for all of the countries studied. The data also suggest that more women are in junior- rather than middle- or senior-management positions and need to break through the glass ceiling in order to reach top-echelon positions.
Proportion of seats held by women in single or lower houses of national parliament  2000 and 2017 (percentage)
Show Data
Download to CSV
