
SDG Goals
 
 
Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
Gender equality and womens empowerment have advanced in recent decades. Progress in enrolment at all education levels has been observed  yet wide gender disparities exist in some regions and countries at higher education levels. Maternal mortality has declined and skilled care during delivery has increased. Progress has been made in the area of sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights. Childbearing among adolescents has decreased. However  gender inequality persists worldwide  depriving women and girls of their basic rights and opportunities. Achieving gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls will require more vigorous efforts  including legal frameworks  to counter deeply rooted gender-based discrimination that often results from patriarchal attitudes and related social norms.
Photo Credit :  The World Bank/Mousa Sabury/Rumi Consultancy

Intimate partner violence against women and girls is found in every region

    Physical and sexual violence is common against women and girls in all regions  and much of it is at the hands of intimate partners. When perpetrated by an intimate partner  violence can be especially traumatic and debilitating. According to surveys undertaken between 2005 and 2016 in 87 countries (including 30 from developed regions)  19 per cent of girls and women aged 15 to 49 said they experienced physical and/or sexual violence by an intimate partner in the 12 months prior to the survey.

    The prevalence of violence against women varies within and among regions. Levels of intimate partner violence are highest in Oceania excluding Australia and New Zealand  ranging from 19 to 44 per cent in countries with data. Prevalence is lower overall in Europe  with levels of less than 10 per cent in most of the 29 countries with available data.

    In the most extreme cases  violence against women and girls can result in death. In 2012  almost half of all women who were victims of intentional homicide worldwide were killed by an intimate partner or family member  compared to 6 per cent of male victims.

    Social acceptability and widespread impunity for perpetrators are among the main challenges contributing to violence against women. In 37 countries  for example  perpetrators of rape are exempted from prosecution if they are married to or subsequently marry the victim.
Proportion of ever-partnered women and girls aged 15 to 49 years subjected to physical or sexual violence by a current or former intimate partner in the previous 12 months  2005-2016 (latest available) (percentage)
Note: The figure reflects available data from 87 countries (covering 43 per cent of the worlds population) over the period 2005-2016. The number of countries represented in each region is in parentheses. Oceania* refers to Oceania excluding Australia and New Zealand throughout the publication.
Show Data
Download to CSV

Child marriage is slowly declining  but remains commonplace in Southern Asia and sub-Saharan Africa

    Child marriage violates the rights of children in a way that often leads to a lifetime of disadvantage and deprivation  especially for girls. Typically  child brides have limited opportunities for education and employment  are at increased risk of domestic violence and other assaults to their physical and mental health  and have little decision-making power within the household  especially when married to older men.

    The practice of child marriage has been slowly declining. Around 2015  just over one in four women between the ages of 20 and 24 were married before the age of 18; around 2000  the ratio was one in three. Faster progress has been made in delaying the marriage of girls under age 15  which declined from 11 per cent around 2000 to 8 per cent around 2015. That said  progress has been uneven across regions and countries.

    In Southern Asia  the proportion of women married before age 18 dropped by about 27 per cent; the proportion married before age 15 declined by about 44 per cent. In sub-Saharan Africa  the proportions dropped 13 per cent and 24 per cent  respectively. Nevertheless  early marriage in these regions remains commonplace  with more than one in three women reportedly married before age 18. Indeed  the 10 countries with the highest rates of child marriage are found in these two regions.
Proportion of women between 20 and 24 years of age who were married or in union before ages 15 and 18  around 2000 and around 2015 (percentage)
Note: The values for 2015 refer to the latest available data for 120 countries (covering 64 per cent of the worlds population of women aged 20 to 24 years) over the period 2010-2016. For regions where the population coverage is below 50 per cent  the number of countries with available data is in parentheses. Oceania* refers to Oceania excluding Australia and New Zealand throughout the publication.
Show Data
Download to CSV

Despite progress  childbearing among adolescents in sub-Saharan Africa remains high

    Child marriage is closely linked to childbirth among adolescents and a concomitant loss of opportunities. Target 3.7 calls for universal access to sexual and reproductive health care services (including family planning)  information and education  which should help to prevent adolescent childbearing and unintended pregnancies.

    Reducing the adolescent birth rate is integral to the health and well-being of adolescent girls and to their social and economic prospects. Globally  childbearing among adolescents declined by 21 per cent between 2000 and 2015. Central and Southern Asia made the greatest progress: the region reduced the adolescent birth rate by more than 50 per cent  largely due to advances in Southern Asia. Rates remain highest in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean  despite progress in both regions.
Adolescent birth rate  2000 and 2015 (number of live births per 1 000 adolescent women aged 15 to 19)
Note:  Data are based on time-use surveys conducted between 2000 and 2014 in 59 countries  30 from developing regions and 29 from developed regions. Oceania* refers to Oceania excluding Australia and New Zealand throughout the publication.
Show Data
Download to CSV

The prevalence of FGM remains high in some countries  despite overall progress

    Female genital mutilation (FGM) is a human rights violation affecting girls and women worldwide  but especially in communities
  where it persists as a social norm. The practice can cause severe pain  excessive bleeding  infections (including HIV)  infertility 
  complications during childbirth and sometimes death. The exact number of girls and women affected globally is unknown  but at least
  200 million have been subjected to FGM in the 30 countries (half of them in Western Africa) where the practice is concentrated and that
  have nationally representative prevalence data.

    Prevalence rates for this harmful practice have declined by 24 per cent since around 2000  with some countries making rapid progress. FGM remains widespread in other countries with data. On average  more than one in three girls aged 15 to 19 have been subjected to FGM in the 30 countries where the practice is concentrated  compared to nearly one in two around 2000.
Proportion of girls aged 15 to 19 who have undergone female genital mutilation in 30 countries with representative prevalence data  around 2000 to around 2015 (percentage)
Note: The figures are population-weighted averages based on comparable data from 30 countries where the practice is concentrated and with representative prevalence data. The values for 2015 refer to the latest available data collected between 2010 and 2016.
Show Data
Download to CSV

Women spent almost three times as many hours on unpaid domestic and care work as men

    The time spent on unpaid housework and caregiving undermines womens ability to engage in other activities  such as education and paid labour. The average amount of time women spend on unpaid domestic work and caregiving at home is almost triple that of men  according to survey data from 83 countries and areas.

    Data for a subset of countries (mainly from Latin American and European countries) suggest this disparity widens during periods when women are most likely to have young children at home. Women dedicate more time than men caring for family members  especially children. This activity often overlaps with domestic duties  making it difficult to capture accurately in time-use surveys.
Proportion of time spent on unpaid domestic and care work  women and men  2000-2016 (latest available) (percentage of time spent per day)
Note: The figure reflects available data for 83 countries and areas over the period 2000-2016. Data disaggregated by unpaid domestic work and unpaid care work are only available for 71 countries. The number of countries and areas represented in each type of unpaid work is indicated in parentheses. 
Show Data
Download to CSV

The corridors of political and economic power continue to be dominated by men

    Effective policymaking to achieve gender equality demands broad political participation. Yet womens representation in single or lower houses of parliament in countries around the world was only 23.4 per cent in 2017  just 10 percentage points higher than in 2000.

    Even in the two regions most advanced in terms of womens representationAustralia and New Zealand and Latin America and the Caribbeanwomen occupy fewer than one out of three seats in parliament. Northern Africa and Western Asia has made impressive advances: the proportion of seats held by women rose nearly fourfold between 2000 and 2017. Nevertheless  women still hold fewer than one in five parliamentary seats in the region.

    Slow progress suggests that stronger political will and more ambitious measures are needed. Quotas to boost womens political participation and empowerment have been helpful: 75 out of 190 countries (39 per cent) have used some form of quota system to increase womens representation  and election results in 2016 show that the strategy is working. However  quotas may also impose a false ceiling on womens representation; they therefore need to be periodically reviewed and updated to ensure continued progress.

    Women are also underrepresented in managerial positions  especially in senior and middle management. In most of the 67 countries with data from 2009 to 2015  less than a third of senior- and middle-management positions were held by women. Modest improvements can be observed in some countries. Over the past decade  the share of women in senior and middle management increased in about half of the countries with available data. However  the proportion of women in these positions remains significantly lower than the share of women in total employment for all of the countries studied. The data also suggest that more women are in junior- rather than middle- or senior-management positions and need to break through the glass ceiling in order to reach top-echelon positions.
Proportion of seats held by women in single or lower houses of national parliament  2000 and 2017 (percentage)
Show Data
Download to CSV

Only half of women in selected countries make their own decisions regarding sexual relations  contraceptive use and health care

    Women and girls autonomy in decision-making over sexual relations  contraceptive use and access to sexual and reproductive health services is key to their empowerment and to fully exercising their reproductive rights. In 45 countries with available data  43 of which are in developing regions  just over half (52 per cent) of women aged 15 to 49 years who are married or in union make their own informed decisions about sexual relations and the use of contraceptives and health services.
Proportion of women aged 15 to 49 years (married or in union) who make their own informed decisions regarding sexual relations  contraceptive use and health care  2007-2015 (latest available) (percentage)
Note: The figure reflects available data from 45 countries (covering 7 per cent of the worlds population) over the period 2007-2015. The number of countries represented in each region is in parentheses.
Show Data
Download to CSV
 Goal 4
  

    Goal 6  
