
SDG Goals
 
 
Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls

             The World Bank/Lakshman Nadaraja
        
 International commitments to advance gender equality have brought about improvements in some areas: child marriage and female genital mutilation (FGM) have declined in recent years  and womens representation in the political arena is higher than ever before. But the promise of a world in which every woman and girl enjoys full gender equality  and where all legal  social and economic barriers to their empowerment have been removed  remains unfulfilled. In fact  that goal is probably even more distant than before  since women and girls are being hit hard by the COVID-19 pandemic. The crisis is creating circumstances that have already contributed to a surge in reports of violence against women and girls  and may increase child marriage and FGM. Moreover  women are likely to take on most additional care work owing to the closure of schools and day-care centres. They are also on the front lines in fighting the coronavirus  since women account for nearly 70 per cent of health and social workers globally.

COVID-19 is intensifying the risk of violence against women and girls
The coronavirus pandemic lockdowns have confined many women and girls to their homes  sometimes with abusive partners  putting them at greater risk of domestic violence. Even before the pandemic  physical and sexual violence against women were all too common. According to surveys conducted between 2005 and 2017 in 106 countries  18 per cent of ever-partnered women and girls 15 to 49 years of age experienced such violence by a current or former intimate partner in the 12 months prior to the survey.
Already  data from several countries show an increase in reporting of domestic violence to helplines  womens refuges and shelters  and the police. When considering such data  it is important to keep in mind that less than 40 per cent of women who experience violence report this crime or seek help. Being confined at home with an abusive partner and  in some countries  lacking access to mobile phones or the Internet  makes it more difficult for women to safely reach out for help. According to data from 66 countries over the period 2016 to 2018  mobile phone ownership among women was 6.8 percentage points lower than for men  on average. Women are also more likely to have their phones monitored by abusive or controlling partners. In addition  because of service disruptions and closures  women experiencing violence have less access to support and may not seek or be able to receive medical care  if needed.

  The global pandemic could set back progress to end child marriage and female genital mutilation
Marriage before the age of 18 is a human rights violation  mostly affecting girls  and can lead to a lifetime of disadvantage and deprivation. One in five women (20.2 per cent) between the ages of 20 and 24 was married before the age of 18 around 2019  compared with about one in four (23.8 per cent) 10 years earlier. Southern Asia has seen the greatest decline over this period. Today  the risk of child marriage is highest in sub-Saharan Africa  where more than one in three women (34.5 per cent) between the ages of 20 and 24 were married before the age of 18. School closures and widening poverty as a result of the pandemic could put more girls at risk.
FGM is another blatant violation of human rights. At least 200 million girls and women have been subjected to FGM in 31 countries where the practice is concentrated; half of these countries are in Western Africa. Although this harmful practice has been declining  there are still countries where FGM is almost universal  where at least 9 in 10 girls and women aged 15 to 49 years have been cut. Even in countries where the practice has become less common  progress would need to accelerate by a factor of 10 to meet the global target of elimination by 2030  owing to population growth. COVID-19 is interrupting programmes to end FGM  which could threaten progress.
Proportion of women 20 to 24 years of age who were married or in union before age 15 and before age 18  around 2009 and around 2019 (percentage)
* Excluding Australia and New Zealand
Note: The values for 2019 refer to the latest available data for 91 countries (covering 77 per cent of the world's population of women aged 20 to 24 years) over the period 20132019. The values for 2009 refer to the latest available data for these countries over the period 20032009. Confidence intervals are not shown here  and apparent differences over time may not be statistically significant.
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Women spend more time than men in unpaid work  a burden that is likely to get heavier during the pandemic
In an average day  women spend about three times as many hours in unpaid domestic and care work as men  according to the latest data from 89 countries and areas between 2001 and 2018. Time spent in these activities tends to be even higher for women with young children at home. In roughly 75 per cent of countries with trend data  a small decrease has been observed in the time spent by women on unpaid domestic and care work compared with that spent by men.
The COVID-19 crisis is radically changing how people  particularly women  spend their time  often with a negative impact on their well-being. A poll conducted in 17 countries shows that both women and men are taking more responsibility for household chores and the care of children and family during the lockdown  but the majority of work continues to fall on women and girls  reflecting a pre-pandemic pattern.
Proportion of time spent on unpaid domestic and care work  women and men  20012018 (latest available) (percentage of time spent per day)
Note: The figure reflects available data for 89 countries and areas over the period 20012018. The number of countries and areas represented in each type of unpaid work is indicated in parentheses. 

  Women are increasingly assuming positions of power  but the world is still far from parity
As of 1 January 2020  womens representation in national parliaments (lower chamber and unicameral parliaments) had reached 24.9 per cent  up from 22.3 per cent in 2015. The share of female representation ranged from more than 30 per cent in Australia and New Zealand  Latin America and the Caribbean  and Europe to only 6.2 per cent in Oceania (excluding Australia and New Zealand). Data from 133 countries and areas show that women now have better access to decision-making positions at the local level  holding 36.3 per cent of elected seats in local deliberative bodies. Only 13 per cent and 15 per cent of countries  respectively  have reached gender balance (40 per cent or more) in legislative bodies in national parliaments and in local government. This progress is largely attributed to legislated gender quotas.
In 2019  women represented 39 per cent of the worlds workers and half of the worlds working-age population  but only 28 per cent of managerial positions (up from 25 per cent in 2000). Women face higher barriers than men in accessing employment. And when they do get a job  they are often excluded from decision-making positions. In 2019  women accounted for 41 per cent of managerial positions in South-Eastern Asia and 40 per cent in Northern America  but only 8 per cent in Northern Africa.
In the context of COVID-19  it is critical that women are fairly represented in leadership positions related to the pandemic. This will help to avoid deepening existing inequalities. It will also ensure that gender dimensions and investments in gender equality are included in response and recovery legislation  economic packages and budgets during and after the pandemic.

 Women's lack of decision-making power extends even to their own reproductive health
Slightly more than half of all women (55 per cent) make their own decisions when it comes to sexual and reproductive health and rights  based on 20072018 data from 57 countries on women aged 15 to 49 who are either married or in union. The analysis also found that women have the most autonomy in deciding on the use of contraception (91 per cent). However  only three in four women are making their own decisions regarding health care or on whether or not to have sex.
Progress on other fronts is encouraging: in 2019  countries had established 73 per cent of the laws and regulations needed to guarantee full and equal access to sexual and reproductive health and rights  according to data from 75 countries. The findings were particularly heartening when it comes to HIV. On average  countries had set in place 87 per cent of laws and regulations needed for HIV counselling and testing services; 91 per cent of those needed for HIV treatment and care services; and 96 per cent for HIV confidentiality. Meanwhile  countries had instituted 79 per cent of relevant laws and regulations that stipulate full  free and informed consent of individuals before they receive contraceptive services  including sterilization.
Proportion of women aged 15 to 49 years who make their own decisions regarding sexual and reproductive health and rights  most recent data 20072018 (percentage)
Note: The number of countries with comparable survey data included in the regional aggregations is presented in parentheses.
Show Data
Download to CSV
 Goal 4
  

    Goal 6  
