
 Informal employment was not an option for many workers displaced at the start of the pandemic  
In 2019  2 billion people worldwide (60 per cent of global employment) worked in the informal sector. Although these jobs are characterized by low quality and lack of social protection  they have traditionally been a source of income for workers displaced from the formal sector. This was not the case in the early months of the pandemic due to COVID-19 containment measures and mobility restrictions. Rather than becoming unemployed or shifting to informal jobs  as in previous crises  laid-off employees and self-employed workers left the labour force. Emerging evidence from 29 countries shows that informal employment was disproportionately affected by job losses in most of these countries in 2020. In Latin America and the Caribbean  informal workers were twice as likely to lose their jobs than their formal counterparts. As economic activity gradually resumed  informal employment  especially self-employment  has strongly rebounded in some regions  and many informal workers have returned from inactivity. For example  informal jobs accounted for over 70 per cent of net job creation in many Latin American countries since mid-2020.
Rising poverty and pandemic-related disruptions are forcing millions of children into child labour
Worldwide  160 million children (63 million girls and 97 million boys) were engaged in child labour at the beginning of 2020. This is an increase of 8.4 million children since 2016  translating to almost 1 out of 10 children engaged in child labour worldwide. Nearly half of them are involved in hazardous work that directly jeopardizes their health  safety or morals. Additional economic shocks and school closures caused by COVID-19 mean that children already in child labour may be working longer hours or under worsening conditions; many more may be forced into the worst forms of child labour due to job and income losses among vulnerable families. The latest evidence warns that  globally  9 million additional children are at risk of being pushed into child labour by the end of 2022  compared to 2020  as a result of rising poverty driven by the pandemic.
