
SDG Goals
 
 
Goal 8: Promote sustained  inclusive and sustainable economic growth  full and productive employment and decent work for all
Sustained and inclusive economic growth is a prerequisite for sustainable development  which can contribute to improved livelihoods for people around the world. Economic growth can lead to new and better employment opportunities and provide greater economic security for all. Moreover  rapid growth  especially among the least developed and other developing countries  can help them reduce the wage gap relative to developed countries  thereby diminishing glaring inequalities between the rich and poor.

  Increased economic growth is needed to meet the target of 7 per cent GDP growth in the least developed countries
In the period 2010-2014  the global average annual growth rate of real GDP per capita was 1.6 per cent  slightly below the rate achieved over the period of 20002004. The growth rate of countries in developing regions was more than triple that of developed regions (4.1 per cent versus 1.3 per cent  respectively)  yet the rates for both regions were below their historical averages. This suggests that much work remains to achieve the goal of sustained and inclusive economic growth. The challenge is particularly steep for the least developed countries  whose per capita growth accelerated for a time  but has since slowed to only 2.6 per cent on average during 2010-2014  less than half the target rate of at least 7 per cent a year.
Average annual growth rate of real GDP per capita  20002004  2005-2009 and 2010-2014 (percentage)
 Show Data 
Download to CSV
 

  Labour productivity in developing regions  despite improvements  remains far below that of developed regions
Growth in labour productivity in developing regions outpaced that of developed regions  especially in Asia. That said  the productivity of workers in the poorest regions is still only a small fraction of that of workers in the developed world. Workers in Southern Asia and sub-Saharan Africa  for example  are only about 5 per cent as productive as those in developed regions  when measured as a percentage of GDP. Even the developing region with the highest labour productivity  Western Asia  has only about 40 per cent of the labour productivity of developed regions  and this rate has declined slightly since 2000.
Labour productivity (GDP per worker) in constant 2005 US dollars  2005 and 2015 (Thousands of US$)
 Show Data 
Download to CSV
 

  Women are 15 per cent more likely to be unemployed than men worldwide  but the gender gap is far larger in Northern Africa and Western Asia
Global unemployment rate stood at 6.1 per cent in 2015  down from a peak of 6.6 per cent in 2009. Unemployment was lowest in Southern  Eastern and South-Eastern Asia  below 5 per cent  compared to other regions of the world  where the average was around 7 per cent or higher. Globally  women are more likely to be unemployed than men. Differences are most striking in Western Asia and Northern Africa  where the unemployment rate of women is more than twice that of men.
Unemployment rates by sex  2015 (percentage)
 Show Data 
Download to CSV
 

  While the share of adults with bank accounts rose by 20 per cent in four years  some two billion people still lack this important financial service
Between 2011 and 2014  the proportion of the worlds adult population with an account at a financial institution or a mobile money service increased from 51 per cent to 62 per cent  meaning that 700 million adults became account holders during this period. However  2 billion adults worldwide still lack an account at a financial institution.  Financial exclusion disproportionately affected women and the poor. The proportion of women who are account holders is 9 percentage points lower than the proportion of men account holders. Moreover  the proportion of account holders among the poorest 40 per cent of households is 14 percentage points lower than among those living in the richest 60 per cent of households.
Percentage of the worlds adult population that has an account at a financial institution  2011 and 2014  (percentage)
 Goal 7
  

    Goal 9  
