

  Occupational safety and health becomes an even heavier challenge as workplaces reopen

  In the age of COVID-19  occupational safety and health  a core aspect of decent work  is more important than ever. Workers have the right to feel safe in their workplaces  but many are exposed to undue risks. More than 10 work-related fatalities were reported per 100 000 workers in 9 out of 71 countries with available data since 2010. The same data showed that migrants are exposed to more risks and hazards at work than non-migrant workers. They also had a higher incidence of fatal and non-fatal occupational injuries than non-migrant workers in three quarters of countries with recent comparable data.

  Implementing adequate health and safety measures and promoting supportive working environments are fundamental to protecting the safety of workers. This is especially relevant for health workers and those providing essential services during the pandemic. In addition  policies must ensure that all necessary precautions are taken to protect both workers and consumers as workplaces reopen.

  Tourism is facing unprecedented challenges  with many small island developing States confronting new and harsh economic realities
 During 20082018  the contribution of tourism to total GDP increased in 43 of the 70 countries that reported data. This highlights the growing importance of tourism in the global economy  and its potential for contributing to sustained  inclusive and sustainable economic growth. Tourism is one of the economic sectors most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic due to the closure of borders  travel bans and lockdown measures. Depending on when travel restrictions are lifted and national borders reopen  international travel arrivals in 2020 may decrease by 60 to 80 per cent compared with 2019. Countries with the highest number of reported COVID-19 cases account for about 55 per cent of global inbound and 68 per cent of global outbound tourism expenditure. The effects of the crisis on these economies will spill over to other countries  particularly those small island developing States and territories that are heavily dependent on international tourism from affected source markets. 
