
SDG Goals
 
 
Promote sustained  inclusive and sustainable economic growth  full and productive employment and decent work for all

             The World Bank/Maria Fleischmann
        
 Sustained and inclusive economic growth can drive progress  create decent jobs for all and improve living standards. Globally  real GDP per capita and labour productivity have increased  and unemployment has dropped back to pre-financial-crisis levels. However  sluggish growth overall has prompted a rethinking of economic and social policies to achieve the transformational objectives of Goal 8 so as to meet economic growth targets in least developed countries; increase employment opportunities  especially for young people; reduce inequalities across regions  age groups and genders; decrease informal employment; and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers. 

  Economic growth in least developed countries is again on the upswing  but the 7 per cent target is still out of reach
 Real GDP per capitaa proxy for the average standard of living increased globally by 1.9 per cent in 2017  compared to by 1.3 per cent in 2016. That growth is expected to remain steady at about 2 per cent until 2020. In least developed countries (LDCs)  the SDG target aims for at least 7 per cent real GDP growth. In those countries  real GDP accelerated from an average annual rate of 5.8 per cent over the period 2000 to 2004  to 7.1 per cent over 2005 to 2009  before slowing to 4.8 per cent over 2010 to 2017. Growth in LDCs is expected to climb to 5.7 per cent in 2020 owing to favourable external economic conditions along with stable commodity prices that encourage financial flows and investment in natural resource projects and infrastructure. However  this still falls short of the target. Policies that promote economic diversification in those countries are needed to ensure long-term sustainability and more inclusive growth. 
Annual growth rate in real GDP in least developed countries  20002017 (percentage)
 Show Data 
Download to CSV
 

  Labour productivity is rising  although wide disparities can be found among regions
 Since the global economic downturn of 2009  labour productivity (measured as GDP per employed person) has been increasing worldwide  with consistently positive annual growth rates since 2010. In 2018  labour productivity increased by 2.1 per cent globally  the highest annual growth since 2010. However  wide disparities are found across regions. Between 2017 and 2018  average output per worker grew the most in Central and Southern Asia (4.8 per cent) and in Eastern and South-Eastern Asia (4.2 per cent)  while little changed in sub-Saharan Africa (0.3 per cent) and in Latin America and the Caribbean (0.5 per cent). 
Annual growth rate of real GDP per worker  2015 and 2018 (percentage)
 Show Data 
Download to CSV
 

  Informal employment remains a major challenge to the goal of decent work for all
 Informal employment remains pervasive throughout the developing world. Based on the latest available data for 54 developing countries  in three quarters of countries  more than half of those with jobs in non-agricultural sectors are informally employed. In about 70 per cent of countries  the share of informal employment in non-agricultural sectors is higher for women than for men. These findings warrant urgent attention from policymakers given the adverse impact of informal employment on earnings  social protection  occupational safety  health and working conditions generally. Informal employment is linked to higher poverty rates and is a major challenge to the goal of decent work for all. 

  The continuing pay gap between women and men is a glaring reminder of gender inequality
 Women still earn less than men. An analysis of the latest available data for 62 countries found that mens median hourly pay is 12 per cent higher than that of women. Furthermore  men had a wage advantage in every major occupational category in 49 countries with relevant data. The median gender pay gap exceeded 20 per cent in managerial and professional occupations  and among craft and related trade workers and plant machine operators and assemblers. Gender pay gaps are rooted in rigid social norms and cultural expectations about womens roles in society. When combined with differences in employment opportunities and lower access to social protection  they can result in long-term income gaps and compromise gender equality now and in the future. 

  The global unemployment rate is steadily dropping  but remains high in some regions and among youth
 The global unemployment rate has finally recovered from the global financial crisis of 2009. In 2018  it stood at 5 per centmatching the pre-crisis level. However  large disparities exist across regions and age groups. In 2018  the unemployment rates in Northern Africa and Western Asia (9.9 per cent) and Latin America and the Caribbean (8.0 per cent) were over 2.5 times higher than those in Central and Southern Asia (3.2 per cent). While gender disparities in unemployment rates are less than 1 per cent globally  they are alarming in some regions  such as Western Asia and Northern Africa. In those regions  the unemployment rate for women was over 8 percentage points higher than for men in 2018; in Latin America and the Caribbean  the rate for women was almost 3 percentage points higher. Whats more  youth are three times more likely to be unemployed than adults. In 2018  the youth unemployment rate was 12 per cent compared to 4 per cent for adults.
Unemployment rate  by region  age and sex  2018 (percentage)
* Excluding Australia and New Zealand.
 Show Data 
Download to CSV
 

  The talents and energy of one fifth of the worlds youth are not being effectively harnessed
 In 2018  one fifth of the worlds youth were not engaged in either education  employment or training (NEET). In other words  they were neither gaining professional experience nor acquiring or developing skills through educational or vocational programmes during that formative stage of life. The situation is most serious in Central and Southern Asia and in Northern African and Western Asia  where more than one quarter of youth fall into this category. 
 Gender differences in this regard are pervasive. In 2018  young women were more than twice as likely as young men to be unemployed or outside the labour force and not in school or in a training programme (young women had a NEET rate of 30 per cent compared to 13 per cent for young men). In Central and Southern Asia  46 per cent of young women fell into this category compared to 10 per cent of young men. 
Proportion of youth not in education  employment or training  by sex  2018 (percentage)
 Show Data 
Download to CSV
 
 Goal 7
  

    Goal 9  
