
SDG Goals
 
 
End hunger  achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture

             The World Bank/Jamie Martin
        
Eradicating hunger and achieving food security remains a challenge  more so in the wake of the COVID-19 crisis. At the global level  hunger and food insecurity have been on the rise  and malnutrition still affects millions of children. The situation is likely to get worse owing to economic slowdowns and disruptions caused by a pandemic-triggered recession. In addition to COVID-19  the desert locust upsurge in six Eastern African countries and Yemen  where 35 million people are already experiencing acute food insecurity  remains alarming. To mitigate the threats posed by the pandemic to vulnerable populations  countries need to take immediate action to keep trade flowing  to strengthen food supply chains and to increase agricultural production.

  Recent increases in food insecurity are likely to worsen as a result of COVID-19

    Since 2014  the global prevalence of undernourishment (chronic food insecurity) has remained virtually unchanged at slightly below 9 per cent. However  the total number of people going hungry has slowly increased for several consecutive years. Almost 690 million people were undernourished in 2019  up by nearly 60 million from 2014.

      Eliminating hunger alone will not ensure that everyone has access to sufficient nutritious food. An estimated 25.9 per cent of the global population  2 billion people  were affected by moderate or severe food insecurity in 2019  an increase from 22.4 per cent in 2014. People experiencing moderate food insecurity are typically unable to eat a healthy  balanced diet on a regular basis because of income or other resource constraints. Those facing severe food insecurity  around 750 million people  tend to run out of food and  at worst  go a day  or days  without eating. The recent increase in food insecurity was primarily due to worsening situations in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America. The estimates for 20162019 also indicate that food insecurity was higher among adult women than men in every region.

    Along with conflict  climate shocks and the locust crisis  COVID-19 poses an additional threat to food systems  indirectly reducing purchasing power and the capacity to produce and distribute food  which affects the most vulnerable populations. In 2020  up to 132 million more people may suffer from undernourishment because of COVID-19.
Prevalence of moderate or severe food insecurity  2014 and 2019 averages (percentage)

  Small-scale food producers  already disadvantaged  are being hit hard by the effects of the pandemic
Small-scale farmers play a critical role in food production worldwide  although they routinely face difficulties accessing land and other productive resources  along with information  financial services  markets and opportunities. Available data show that the share of small-scale producers among all food producers in Africa  Asia and Latin America ranges from 40 per cent to 85 per cent. However  their productivity is systematically lower  on average  than that of larger-scale producers  and in most countries their incomes are less than half of the incomes of their larger counterparts  as shown by data collected from selected countries.
The lockdown measures in place to prevent the spread of the coronavirus have caused businesses and local markets to close  and small-scale food producers are often not allowed to get their products to consumers. 
Average annual income from agriculture  20142016  selected countries (purchasing power parity  constant 2011 prices in thousands of dollars)
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Urgent actions are especially needed to protect the nutritional status of the most vulnerable children during the pandemic
Chronic undernutrition  or stunting  puts children at greater risk of dying from common infections; it is also associated with poor cognitive development. The proportion of children under 5 years of age suffering from stunting decreased from 32 per cent in 2000 to 23 per cent in 2015 and 21 per cent in 2019. However  144 million children under age 5 were still affected by stunting in 2019. Three quarters of these children lived in just two regions: Southern Asia (39 per cent) and sub-Saharan Africa (36 per cent). More intensive efforts are needed to achieve the global target of bringing down the number of stunted children to 99 million by 2025 and to 82 million by 2030.
In 2019  6.9 per cent (or 47 million) children under 5 were affected by wasting  or acute undernutrition  a condition caused by limited nutrient intake and infection. This is well above the 5 per cent global target for 2025  and the 3 per cent global target for 2030. More than half of the children suffering from wasting live in Central and Southern Asia  the only region with a prevalence of more than 10 per cent. 
The growth and development of these children are at higher risk during the current crisis due to constrained access to nutritious diets and essential nutrition services.
Proportion of children under 5 years who are affected by stunting and wasting  2019 (percentage)

          * Excluding Australia and New Zealand.
          ** Excluding Japan.
          *** Including estimates only for the United States of America. Confidence intervals are not available.
          Note: Data coverage is low for Europe  therefore  it is not included in the chart.
Show Data
Download to CSV

  The incidence of overweight in young children is on the rise increasing  a warning sign for future health problems

  Childhood overweight is recognized as a global public health problem because of its pernicious influence on the incidence of acute and chronic diseases  healthy development and the economic productivity of individuals and societies. In 2019  5.6 per cent (or 38 million) children under age 5 worldwide were overweight. The current global prevalence represents a medium level of severity  signalling that preventative actions are urgently needed for the youngest population.

  Overweight and wasting often coexist in a population  and are considered the double burden of malnutrition. For example  in Northern Africa and South-Eastern Asia  the prevalence of wasting was 7.2 per cent and 8.2 per cent  respectively  in 2019  while overweight was 11.3 per cent and 7.5 per cent.
Proportion of children under 5 years who are overweight  2019 (percentage)

          * Excluding Australia and New Zealand.
          ** Excluding Japan.
          Note: Data coverage is low for Europe  therefore  it is not included in the chart.
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Investment in agriculture  relative to its contribution to the economy  continues to decline

  Public investment in agriculture can enhance productivity  attract private investment and help reduce poverty and hunger. The share of government contribution to agriculture compared with the sectors contribution to GDP  known as the agriculture orientation index  fell from 0.42 in 2001 to 0.31 in 2015 and 0.28 in 2018 worldwide. Meanwhile  the share of sector-allocable aid to agriculture from all donors fell from nearly 25 per cent in the mid-1980s to only 5 per cent in 2018  representing $12.8 billion. The fall in agricultural aid is due to a shift in donors focus to social-sector issues  such as improving governance  building social capital and helping fragile states.

  Rising food prices were mostly concentrated in sub-Saharan Africa in 2019

  Sharp increases in food prices were largely concentrated in subSaharan Africa in 2019  driven by production shocks  macroeconomic difficulties and prolonged conflict. In Eastern Africa  extreme weather conditions reduced agricultural outputs and hampered transport  shrinking market supplies and increasing the price of staple crops. Strong regional demand for exports exerted additional upward pressure on prices. In Western Africa  lingering civil insecurity continued to hamper market activities  thereby adversely impacting food prices. Prices in Southern Africa reached record highs owing to weather-induced shocks and significant economic challenges  including strong depreciation of local currencies. The depreciation of local currencies also contributed to high food prices in other regions  such as Latin America. In 2020  an upsurge in food demand and disruptions to supply chains triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic underpinned food price increases in several countries in the second half of March through April.
 Goal 1
  

    Goal 3  
