
SDG Goals
 
 
Build resilient infrastructure  promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation

             The World Bank/Yosef Hadar
        
 Inclusive and sustainable industrialization  together with innovation and infrastructure  can unleash dynamic and competitive economic forces that generate employment and income. They play a key role in introducing and promoting new technologies  facilitating international trade and enabling the efficient use of resources. However  the world still has a long way to go to fully tap this potential. LDCs  in particular  need to accelerate the development of their manufacturing sector if they are to meet the 2030 target  and scale up investment in scientific research and innovation. On a positive note  the carbon intensity of manufacturing industries declined at an annual rate of almost 3 per cent from 2010 and 2016  showing a general decoupling of CO2 emissions and GDP growth. Total official flows for economic infrastructure in developing countries reached $59 billion in 2017  an increase of 32.5 per cent in real terms since 2010. Further  impressive gains have been made in mobile connectivity. 

  Despite recent progress  industrialization in least developed countries is still too slow to meet the 2030 target
 The growth of manufacturing in both developing and developed regions slowed in 2018  attributed largely to emerging trade and tariff barriers that constrain investment and future expansion. Despite the slowdown  the global share of manufacturing value added (MVA) in GDP increased marginallyfrom 15.9 per cent in 2008 to 16.5 per cent in 2018  when it began to plateau. In LDCs  the share of manufacturing in total GDP increased 2.5 per cent annually between 2015 and 2018. However  that still falls short of the pace needed to achieve a doubling of the MVA share in GDP by 2030  and calls for accelerated action. The disparities in industrial productivity between rich and poor nations remain stark. For instance  MVA per capita was only $114 in LDCs compared to $4 938 in Europe and Northern America  in 2018. 

        Manufacturing value added share in GDP  2008 and 2018 (percentage)
      
* Excluding Australia and New Zealand.
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Small-scale industries in the poorest countries lack the financial services they need to grow and innovate
 Small-scale industries are the backbone of industrial development in developing countries. With a relatively small amount of capital investment and a predominantly local resource base  small-scale industries generate a substantial amount of employment and self-employment. However  one of the biggest challenges those industries face is access to loans or lines of credit for everyday business activities. Adequate financing is crucial for those industries to grow  since it allows them to innovate  improve efficiency  expand to new markets and create new job opportunities. While 31.5 per cent of small-scale industries (manufacturing and services) worldwide benefit from loans or lines of credit  regional differences stand out. For instance  more than half of all small-scale industries in Latin America and the Caribbean receive those types of financial services  compared to 20.7 per cent in sub-Saharan Africa. 

        Proportion of small-scale manufacturing enterprises with a loan or line of credit  most recent value  20092018 (percentage)
      

  Higher-tech manufacturing is growing worldwide  except in sub-Saharan Africa
 Recent years have seen a steady shift away from resource-based  low-tech manufacturing activities towards those that are medium-high- to high-tech. Those higher-tech manufacturing sectors are often reliant on the latest technologies and produce a wide array of consumer goods  from computers  televisions and other communications devices to appliances and other household equipment. The demand for such products tends to increase as income levels rise. 
 The share of medium-high- and high-tech industries in total MVA increased from 40.5 per cent in 2000 to 44.7 per cent in 2016  with large differences across regions. In Eastern and South-Eastern Asia and in Europe and Northern America  for example  over 47 per cent of total MVA came from higher-tech sectors in 2016. In contrast  the shares in Oceania (excluding Australia and New Zealand) and sub-Saharan Africa were only 1.9 per cent and 14.9 per cent  respectively. In sub-Saharan Africa  the proportion of medium-high- and high-tech MVA in total MVA actually fell between 2000 and 2016  but rose in all other regions. 

        Proportion of medium-high and high-tech MVA in total MVA  2000 and 2016 (percentage)
      
* Excluding Australia and New Zealand.
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Global spending on research and development has reached $2 trillion a year  with wide disparities among countries
 The proportion of global GDP invested in research and development (R&D) increased from 1.52 per cent in 2000 to 1.68 per cent in 2016. In absolute terms  global R&D investment reached $2 trillion (purchasing power parity) in 2016  up from $739 billion in 2000. That represents an average annual growth rate of 4.3 per cent when adjusted for inflation. Wide disparities are found among regions. In Europe and Northern America  2.21 per cent of GDP was spent on R&D in 2016  compared to 0.42 per cent and 0.83 per cent  respectively  in sub-Saharan Africa and Western Asia. Such disparities indicate the continued need for strong policy support for increased financing for R&D in developing regions. 

        Gross domestic expenditure on R&D as a proportion of GDP  2016 or latest available year (percentage)
      

  Almost everyone now lives within range of mobile-cellular networks  but not all can afford to use them

      Fixed-broadband Internet connections remain out of reach for many people. But coverage of mobile-cellular signals and mobile-broadband Internet has expanded rapidly  now reaching almost the entire global population. In 2018  96 per cent of the worlds population lived within reach of a mobile-cellular signal  and 90 per cent of people could access the Internet through a third generation (3G) or higher-quality network. However  while most live within range of these signals  not all are able to take advantage of them. The cost of accessing mobile-cellular networks and mobile-broadband Internet remains too high for many  particularly the most disadvantaged and at-risk population groups. In fact  just over half of the worlds population is currently using the Internet  with rates much lower in LDCs (about 20 per cent).
    

        Number of people covered by a mobile network  by technology  20072018 (billions)
      
 Estimate
      Note: LTE (Long-Term Evolution) is a standard for high-speed wireless communication that allows for faster speeds than 3G technologies but does not meet the technical criteria of a 4G wireless service.
Show Data
Download to CSV
 Goal 8
  

    Goal 10  
