
 Fossil fuel subsidies remain alarmingly high  despite a temporary drop in 2020 
 Subsidies that promote the production and use of coal  oil  gas and other fossil fuels cause a range of adverse environmental and health impacts  from air and water pollution to climate change. Such subsidies are among the most significant financial barriers hindering the world's transition to renewable energy sources. In 2020  governments spent $375 billion on subsidies and other support for fossil fuels  a decline from $526 billion in 2019. However  this drop was mainly due to low oil prices and reduced demand during the pandemic rather than structural reforms. In 2021  commodity and energy prices rebounded sharply  and we are likely to see a jump in both consumption and production subsidies for fossil fuels. Today  countries that were hesitant to seize the opportunity presented by low international fuel prices to reform subsidy schemes might be forced to maintain or increase subsidies to offset the increasing fuel prices faced by consumers across the world. Such strategies will have fiscal consequences  however. They will also reduce the resources needed to invest in greener recoveries and sustainable growth. The answer to high fossil fuel prices is a quicker and scaled-up transition to renewable energy sources. 
More effort is needed to fully mainstream sustainable development and global citizenship in national education systems
 Knowledge about sustainable development  global citizenship and peace enables individuals to take appropriate action and positively contribute to the well-being of their communities. Around 90 per cent of countries report that Education for Sustainable Development and Global Citizenship Education are at least partially mainstreamed in national education laws and policies  curricula  teacher education or student assessments in primary and secondary school. However  only 15 per cent of countries report high levels of integration in all four areas. Much lower rates of mainstreaming are reported in technical and vocational education (57 per cent) and in adult education (51 per cent). A recent global survey of primary and secondary teachers found that one in four teachers does not feel ready to teach themes related to these topics. More effort is needed to ensure that these issues are core components of national education systems. 
