

      Countries now need to operationalize the principles of sustainable economic growth
    
Advances in sustainable consumption and production spur progress in all the SDGs. From 2017 to 2019  79 countries and the European Union reported on at least one national policy instrument that contributed to the implementation of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production. Of the reported policy instruments  70 per cent are seen as relevant to the SDGs with strong economic objectives (such as SDGs 8 and 9). Paradoxically  economic and financial instruments represent only 10 per cent of all policies reported in 2019  which reflects a limited operationalization of the vision outlined in the 10-Year Framework. Of all the policies that have quantified targets  40 per cent are aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
The commitment of countries to join forces to create a sustainable and resource-efficient economy is clear  including through multilateral cooperation to accelerate behavioural change across trade flows and value chains  the alignment of ambitious national policies  and the eventual generation of benefits for all. Science-based evidence on sustainable consumption and production and data on policy impacts are crucial to ensuring effective action.

        Businesses must address gaps in the quality of sustainability reporting
    
 Sustainability reporting has been used by an increasing number of companies to demonstrate their commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. A several initiatives have been launched to develop an agreed-upon and harmonized set of indicators for consistent and comparable sustainability reporting. Since 2017  the overall quality of sustainability reports has improved around the world. The share of reporting in the environmental  social  and institutional and governance dimensions that is aligned with the minimum requirements outlined in SDG indicator 12.6.1 (the number of companies publishing sustainability reports) has almost doubled. However  in many of the companies' reports  certain critical aspects of environmental  social and governance domains were hardly mentioned. These include water use  waste and emissions  gender equality  training on anti-corruption issues  and expenditures on employee health and safety. Large disparities were also observed across countries and regions. In Eastern Asia  Latin America and the Caribbean  and Europe and Northern America  firms demonstrated a higher level of reporting of baseline data that fulfilled the minimum requirements. Large gaps in reporting are evident in other regions  especially in Africa  Central Asia and Oceania.
