
SDG Goals
 
 
High-Level Political Forum Goals in Focus
Goal 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
How societies use and manage their natural resources fundamentally shapes their quality of life. One of the core objectives of the 2030 Agenda is to decouple economic growth from resource use and environmental degradation  notably through improved resource efficiency  while improving peoples well-being. This can occur through a shift towards more sustainable consumption and production patterns. Such a shift requires national public policies that create conducive environments  social and physical infrastructure and markets  and a transformation of business practices along global value chains.
Photo Credit :  UNDP Picture This/Joydeep Mukherjee

The material footprint of developing countries has grown  but is still far smaller than that of developed countries

      The  material footprint  of an economy refers to the total amount of raw materials extracted globallyacross the entire supply chainto meet that economy's final consumption demand. People rely on such materials to meet basic needsfor food  clothing  water  shelter  infrastructure and many other aspects of life. Across much of the developing world  an increase in the material footprint is required to enhance the living standards of growing populations. At the same time  it is important to decrease reliance on raw materials and increase their recycling to reduce environmental pressure and impact.
    

      The per-capita material footprint of developing countries grew from five metric tons in 2000 to nine metric tons in 2017  representing a significant improvement in material standard of living. Most of the increase is attributed to a rise in the use of non-metallic minerals  pointing to growth in the areas of infrastructure and construction.
    

      For all types of materials  developed countries have at least double the per-capita footprint of developing countries. In particular  the material footprint for fossil fuels is more than four times higher for developed than developing countries. Because fossil fuels directly impact the environment in various ways  the need to decouple their use from economic growth is key to achieving sustainable consumption and production.
    

      Extraction of raw materials in the developing world is supporting the consumption patterns of richer nations
    

      Domestic material consumption (DMC) refers to materials extracted within a country for use in production processes. Material footprint  on the other hand  takes into account resources found within a country or imported  and is calculated on the basis of final demand. If the DMC is higher than the material footprint  it indicates that a country is exporting materials  usually minerals or biomass. Conversely  if the DMC is lower  it suggests that materials are being imported.
    

      Over the last two decades  DMC has risen rapidly in developing countries to meet the material needs of a growing population and to support improved standards of living. The data also show that a large gap exists between the DMC and the material footprint of both developed and developing countries  but in opposite directions. This implies that at least some of the materials extracted from developing countries are being used to satisfy the consumption habits of developed countries. Although developed countries have not increased either their total material footprint or their DMC  they have not been able to close the gap between their DMC and material footprint.
    

  In part prompted by the SDGs  more and more countries are developing policies to promote sustainable consumption and production

      Sustainable consumption and production policies are a key mechanism for improving living standards without compromising the resource needs of future generations. Such policies aim to decouple economic growth from environmental degradation  increase resource efficiency and promote more sustainable lifestyles.
    

      The development of such instruments has intensified through the adoption of Agenda 2030. In 2018  71 countries plus the European Union reported on macroeconomic policies or other regulatory  voluntary or economic instruments that supported the shift towards sustainable consumption and production patterns across their economies or specific sectors. Taking into account information collected from previous surveys  a total of 108 countries have or had national policies and initiatives relevant to this shift. Europe has taken the lead in that movement  having initiated nearly half of the policy instruments identified  followed by Latin America and the Caribbean and sub-Saharan Africa.
    
Countries with national policies and initiatives relevant to sustainable consumption and production  2015-2018

  More multinationals and other large companies are reporting on sustainability  but the practice needs to expand to smaller enterprises
 

      A sustainability report by a company provides information on the economic  environmental and social impacts of its activities. Sustainability reporting is an important tool for corporate transparency and accountability  one that plays a key role in attaining the Goals of the 2030 Agenda. While still relatively new  sustainability reporting is gaining momentum  driven by new private sector partnerships to achieve the SDGs along with growing interest from companies (especially large companies)  regulators  investors and other stakeholders. According to a recent report from KPMG  93 per cent of the worlds 250 largest companies (in terms of revenue) are now reporting on sustainability  as are three quarters of the top 100 companies in 49 countries.
    

      That said  more methodological work is required to develop a set of core corporate sustainability indicators and align these with overall SDG monitoring. The main challenges are to integrate environmental  social and governance reporting into existing company financial and non-financial reporting models; facilitate harmonization of sustainability reporting requirements and practices; and assure the comparability and reliability of information and data provided by companies on non-financial issues. Another challenge is the lack of expertise and resources for reporting by small and medium-sized enterprises  which play a key role in some economies  especially in developing countries.
    
 Goal 11
  

    Goal 15  
