
Social protection programmes reduce the brunt of poverty and can also prevent people from falling into poverty in the first place. By helping to prevent and ease poverty and inequality at every stage of peoples lives  such programmes make societies more inclusive and stable. However  only 45 per cent of the worlds population are effectively covered by at least one social protection cash benefit. The remaining 55 per centas many as 4 billion peoplehave been left behind. 
The extent of coverage depends on the type of protection system and the region. Globally  68 per cent of people above retirement age receive a pension  but the benefits in many countries are often not enough to lift older people out of poverty. Data also show a global deficit of social protection for other groups: only 22 per cent of the unemployed receive unemployment benefit payments  28 per cent of persons with severe disabilities receive disability cash benefits  one third of children are effectively covered by social protection  and only 41 per cent of women giving birth receive maternity cash benefits. Furthermore  coverage of social assistance cash benefits is as low as 25 per cent for vulnerable groupschildren  people of working age and older persons not protected by contributory schemes.

      The differences among regions are stark: 92 per cent of children are covered by social protection systems in Europe and Northern America  56 per cent in Latin America and the Caribbean  but only 13 per cent in sub-Saharan Africa  and 14 per cent in Eastern and South-Eastern Asia.
Poverty affects children disproportionately. One out of five children live in extreme poverty  and the negative effects of poverty and deprivation in the early years have ramifications that can last a lifetime. Ensuring social protection for all children and other vulnerable groups is critical for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)  particularly in regions with large coverage gaps between children and other segments of the population.
Proportion of population covered by at least one form of social protection benefit  and children covered by social protection  2016 (percentage)
Note: Data for Northern Africa and Western Asia  and Oceania (excluding Australia and New Zealand) are not shown due to low population coverage of available data. Data on children covered by social protection are not shown for Central and Southern Asia due to low population coverage of this data for Southern Asia.
Show Data Download to CSV
