
SDG Goals
 
 
Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere
Giving people in all parts of the world the support they need to lift themselves out of poverty in all its manifestations is the very essence of sustainable development. Goal 1 focuses on ending poverty through interrelated strategies  including the promotion of social protection systems  decent employment and the resilience of the poor. Although the global rate of extreme poverty has been reduced by more than half since 2000  intensified efforts are required to boost the incomes  alleviate the suffering and build the resilience of those still impoverished  particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Social protection systems need to be expanded and risks mitigated for disaster-prone countries  which tend to be among the worlds poorest countries.
Photo Credit :  The World Bank/Dominic Chavez 
Proportion of the population living below 1.90 US dollars a day  1999 and 2013 (percentage)
Note: Oceania* refers to Oceania excluding Australia and New Zealand.
Show Data
Download to CSV
Nearly a billion people have escaped extreme poverty since 1999; three quarters of a billion remain in its grasp
The international poverty line is currently defined as 1.90 US dollars per person per day using 2011 purchasing power parity (PPP). In 2013  an estimated 767 million people lived under the poverty line  down from 1.7 billion people in 1999. This represents a reduction in the global extreme poverty rate from 28 per cent in 1999 to 11 per cent in 2013. The fastest progress was observed in Eastern and South-Eastern Asia  where 3 per cent of the population lived in extreme poverty in 2013  down from 35 per cent in 1999.  Despite a decline in the poverty rate in sub-Saharan Africa  42 per cent of the population continued to subsist in conditions of extreme poverty in 2013. In fact  sub-Saharan Africa was home to about half of the worlds poor. Combined with Southern Asia  the two regions accounted for over 80 per cent of the worlds poorest people that year.
Working poverty has decreased  but it is still pervasive in many regions and disproportionately affects the young
Many of the worlds workers live in extreme poverty due to a lack of decent work opportunities. Almost 10 per cent of the employed population globally lived with their families on less than 1.90 US dollars per person per day in 2016. While the percentage of the working poor has been cut by more than half since 2000when it stood at 28 per centit remains pervasive in a few regions. In sub-Saharan Africa  34 per cent of workers and their families continued to live in extreme poverty in 2016. Working poverty affects youth at a much higher rate than adults: in 2016  15 per cent of young workers worldwide lived under the international poverty line  compared to 9 per cent of adult workers. This pattern holds true across almost all regions.
Proportion of employed population living below 1.90 US dollars a day  youth and adults  2000 and 2016 (percentage)
Note: Adults refer to persons aged 25 and above  youth refers to persons aged 15 to 24.
Less than half the worlds population is covered by at least one social protection scheme
Social protection systems have an important role in protecting the most vulnerable. They are fundamental to preventing and reducing poverty and inequality at every stage of peoples lives. Benefits for children  mothers with newborns  persons with disability  older persons and those who are poor and without jobs help ensure that no one is left behind. Preliminary data show that in 2016  only 45 per cent of the worlds population were covered by at least one social protection cash benefit  and that the proportion varied widely across countries and regions. Sub-Saharan Africa has the lowest coverage  with about 13 per cent of its population covered by at least one social protection benefit  versus 86 per cent of the population in Europe and Northern America.
Proportion of population covered by at least one social protection benefit  2016 (percentage)
Note: Coverage corresponds to the sum of persons protected by contributory schemes and recipients of contributory and non-contributory benefits expressed as a percentage of the total population. Northern Africa and Western Asia and Oceania* data are not shown due to low population coverage of available data.
Show Data Download to CSV
Social protection coverage varies widely by type of benefit  with many vulnerable groups left behind
In 2016  68 per cent of people above retirement age received a pension. However  this global average masks large regional differences. In sub-Saharan Africa  only 22 per cent of people above retirement age received a pension in 2016  while in Europe and North America  pension coverage is almost universal. Other vulnerable groups also lack social protection. In 2016  only 22 per cent of the unemployed worldwide received unemployment benefits  28 per cent of people with severe disabilities collected a disability pension  35 per cent of children were covered by social protection  and 41 per cent of women giving birth received maternity benefits.
Proportion of the worlds population covered by various social protection floors/systems  2016 (percentage)
Show Data Download to CSV
Probabilistic models show that small island developing States are expected to bear disproportionately large economic losses attributed to disasters
Building the resilience of the poor and strengthening disaster risk reduction are key strategies for ending extreme poverty in the most afflicted countries. Economic losses from natural hazards are now reaching an average of 250 to 300 billion US dollars a year. Based on the estimated future lossas measured by Average Annual Loss (AAL)the largest losses will be concentrated in bigger economies. However  smaller and more vulnerable countries  particularly the small island developing States  bear a disproportionate impact in relation to the size of their economies. More efforts should be made to promote disaster risk reduction  particularly in these most vulnerable countries.
Average Annual Loss in relation to 2013 GDP (percentage)
Note: Average Annual Loss is the expected (i.e.  future) economic loss value normalized in annual
terms considering all potential occurrence (both severity and frequency) of natural hazards (earthquakes  cyclonic wind  storm surges and tsunamis) over a long time frame using probabilistic hazard models.
Show Data
Download to CSV

        Goal 2 
