
SDG Goals
 
 
 End poverty in all its
forms everywhere

             Patrick J. Nagel
        
Even before the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic  progress towards Goal 1 had slowed  and the world was not on track to ending extreme poverty by 2030. Now  as the world anticipates the worst economic fallout since the Great Depression  tens of millions of people will be pushed back into poverty  undoing years of steady improvement. As the economic impacts of the pandemic begin to be felt more strongly  the importance of robust social protection systems for safeguarding the poor and vulnerable is becoming clearer than ever. So  too  is the need for effective emergency preparedness  both for pandemics and other hazards that cause disasters. 
COVID-19 shifts forecast on the global goal to end extreme poverty
The share of the worlds population living in extreme poverty declined from 15.7 per cent in 2010 to 10.0 per cent in 2015. However  the pace of global poverty reduction has been decelerating. Nowcast estimates put the global poverty rate in 2019 at 8.2 per cent.
Even before COVID-19  baseline projections suggested that 6 per cent of the global population would still be living in extreme poverty in 2030  missing the target of ending poverty. Assuming the pandemic remains at levels currently expected and that activity recovers later this year  the poverty rate is projected to reach 8.8 per cent in 2020. This is the first rise in global poverty since 1998  and close to the 2017 level. An estimated 71 million additional people will be living in extreme poverty due to COVID-19. Southern Asia and sub-Saharan Africa are expected to see the largest increases in extreme poverty  with an additional 32 million and 26 million people  respectively  living below the international poverty line as a result of the pandemic.
Proportion of people living below $1.90 a day  20102015  2019 nowcast  and forecast before and after COVID-19 (percentage)
Show Data
Download to CSV
Working poverty is expected to increase sharply as a result of the pandemic
The share of the worlds workers living in extreme poverty fell by half over the last decade: from 14.3 per cent in 2010 to 7.1 per cent in 2019. However  the pace of progress has slowed since 2013  requiring reinvigorated efforts to reach the 2030 target. Moreover  the impacts of COVID-19 are projected to push millions more into poverty. As of April 2020  recommended or required workplace closures around the world affected 81 per cent of employers and 66 per cent of own-account workers  severely limiting jobs and income.
The gender gap in working poverty had almost been bridged  but evidence is emerging that women are being disproportionally affected by the pandemic. Young workers are exposed to poverty more systematically than adults  a result of inadequate earnings and deficits in job quality. In 2019  12.8 per cent of workers between the ages of 15 and 24 lived in poverty  compared with 6.3 per cent of workers over the age of 24  with the difference between youth and adult working poverty rates decreasing only marginally since 2000. These disparities are likely to be exacerbated by the COVID-19 crisis  which has already led to a sharp increase in unemployment and underemployment  a decline in labour income and job-quality challenges.
Proportion of employed population living below $1.90 a day  2010 and 2019 (percentage)
Show Data
Download to CSV
Social protection coverage varies widely across regions  with many left exposed in the current crisis
The COVID-19 pandemic will have both immediate and long-term economic consequences for people across the globe. Strong social protection systems are essential for mitigating the effects and preventing many people from falling into poverty. Nevertheless  55 per cent of the worlds population  about 4billion people  did not benefit from any form of social protection in 2016. Only 22 per cent of unemployed workers were covered by unemployment benefits. As of February 2020  only 87 countries had unemployment protection programmes anchored in national legislation  and only 34 of these countries covered the self-employed.
The extent of unemployment benefit coverage varies substantially across regions. Half of unemployed people in Australia and New Zealand receive unemployment payments  and 44 per cent in Europe and Northern America. In contrast  just 3 per cent of the unemployed in sub-Saharan Africa and 12 per cent in Latin America and the Caribbean receive such payments.
Differences across regions in coverage of social assistance cash benefits for vulnerable groups  children  people of working age and older persons not protected by contributory schemes  are similarly pronounced. Sixty-one per cent of people in these groups receive cash benefits in Europe and Northern America  compared with 4 per cent in Central and Southern Asia.
Proportion of vulnerable population receiving social assistance cash benefits  and unemployed persons receiving unemployment cash benefits  2016 (percentage)
Note: Data for Northern Africa and Western Asia and for Oceania (excluding Australia and New Zealand) are not shown due to low population coverage of available data. Data on unemployment benefits are not shown for Central and Southern Asia due to low population coverage of this data for Southern Asia.
Show Data Download to CSV
Disasters affect least developed countries disproportionately
Biological hazards such as COVID-19  along with other hazards such as hurricanes  floods  earthquakes and wildfires  cause disasters and worsen poverty. Based on the latest reporting under the Sendai Framework monitoring process from 80 countries in 2018  23 458 deaths and 2 164 persons missing were attributed to disasters. Direct economic losses of $23.6 billion were reported by 63 countries  of which 73 per cent ($17.1 billion) were recorded in the agricultural sector and 16 per cent ($3.8 billion) in the housing sector.
Least developed countries (LDCs) were disproportionately affected by disasters in 2018. The 17 LDCs reporting disaster-related losses accounted for 14 per cent of the total population of the 80 countries reporting such losses  but over 29 per cent of the total reported deaths and missing persons attributed to disasters. The economic impacts of disasters were also larger for LDCs  relative to the size of their economies. The 17 LDCs reporting economic losses made up 2 per cent of the GDP of all countries reporting such losses  but suffered 10 per cent of the total direct economic losses.
LDCs share of reported human and economic losses due to disasters  compared with their share of the total population and GDP of countries reporting losses  2018 (percentage)
Show Data Download to CSV
 Overview
  

        Goal 2 
