
 Forests are repositories for most of the worlds biodiversity  covering 4.1 billion hectares of land. They help regulate the water cycle  mitigate climate change and are a direct source of food  income  shelter and energy for some 1.6 billion people. Sustainable forest management aims to maintain and enhance the economic  social and environmental value of all types of forests  for current and future generations. There was notable progress towards the sustainable management of the worlds forest from 20002010 to 20102020. The area of forest under certification increased or remained stable at the global level and in most regions  as did the proportion of forests in protected areas or under long-term management plans  and the above-ground forest biomass per hectare.
 Although the rate of decline has slowed  the loss of forests globally remains alarming. The proportion of forest area fell from 31.9 per cent of the worlds total land area in 2000 to 31.2 per cent in 2020. This translates to a net loss of almost 100 million hectares. The rate of forest loss has increased in South-Eastern Asia and Africa  and also in LDCs  landlocked developing countries and SIDS  mostly due to the conversion of forest to agricultural land. Deforestation and forest degradation remain monumental challenges  especially in the tropics. The continuing disappearance of forests signals the need for accelerated action to reduce deforestation  restore degraded lands and implement sustainable forest and land management practices. Such actions will also enhance the resilience of ecosystems to climate change  protect biodiversity and support rural livelihoods. 

          Progress towards sustainable forest management dashboard
      
Note: The annual forest area change rate is calculated using a compound annual change formula.

   Funding is needed to implement legislation adopted in almost all countries in response to invasive alien species
  
 Invasive alien species are animals  plants or other organisms introduced by humans into ecosystems outside their natural range  which have become established and negatively affect native biodiversity. Such species are a major driver of biodiversity loss and species extinction. They also negatively impact ecosystem services  human livelihoods and well-being  and economies. Invasive alien species are introduced to new areas either intentionally  by hunting or fishing  for example  or unintentionally  through a contaminant on traded goods  for instance  or as a hitchhiker on vehicles or boats. With the increased movement of people and goods around the world  the number of established alien species is expected to increase by 36 per cent between 2005 and 2050.
 Preventing the introduction of invasive alien species is the most cost-effective way to address their impacts  which are estimated to cost the global economy billions of dollars annually.   Governments are responding. Nearly all countries (98 per cent) now have national legislation to prevent or control invasive alien species  but the sectoral coverage of such legislation varies widely. Most countries have adopted legislation relevant to plant and animal health in agriculture (92 per cent and 82 per cent  respectively)  but fewer have legislation focused on the environment (42 per cent) or fisheries and aquaculture (27 per cent).
 Adequate resources are crucial to an effective response. However  only 55 per cent of countries have reported allocations from their national budgets to deal with invasive species  while only 37 per cent have accessed global financing mechanisms.
 Goal 14
  

    Goal 16  
