
 
 
Healthy ecosystems and the biological diversity they support are a source of food  water  medicine  shelter and other material goods. They also provide ecosystem services  the cleaning of air and water  for example  which sustain life and increase resiliency in the face of mounting pressures. Nevertheless  human activities have profoundly altered most terrestrial ecosystems: around 40 000 species are documented to be at risk of extinction over the coming decades  10 million hectares of forest (an area the size of Iceland) are being destroyed each year  and more than half of key biodiversity areas remain unprotected.

  In an effort to prevent and halt the degradation of such ecosystems  many countries are sustainably managing their forests  protecting sites critical to biodiversity  and enacting national conservation legislation and policies. However  other opportunities are being lost. The emergence of COVID-19 was an opportunity to integrate biodiversity considerations into economic recovery measures and build a more viable future. But biodiversity has been largely neglected in recovery spending.

  The worlds forest area continues to shrink  mainly due to agricultural expansion
The worlds forest area continues to decline  but at a slightly slower rate than in previous decades. The proportion of forests fell from 31.9per cent of total land area in 2000 to 31.2 per cent in 2020  representing a net loss of almost 100million hectares. Agricultural expansion is driving almost 90 per cent of global deforestation  including 49.6 per cent from expansion for cropland and 38.5 per cent for livestock grazing.
Changes in forest area vary widely from region to region. Asia  Europe and Northern America showed an overall increase in forest area from 2000 to 2020 due to afforestation  landscape restoration and the natural expansion of forests. In contrast  significant losses were observed in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa  mostly due to the conversion of forests into agricultural land.
The felling of forests continues  despite major gains in several regions. Between 2010 and 2021  the area of forest land under certification schemes increased by 35 per cent. The proportion of forests under a long-term management plan increased from 54 per cent in 2010 to 58 per cent in 2020. More than 700 million hectares of forest (18 per cent) were in legally established protected areas in 2020.
While nearly all forests in Central Asia  Europe and Western Asia fall under a management plan  the managed proportion remains low in Latin America and the Caribbean  Oceania and sub-Saharan Africa.
Change of forest area coverage  20002020 (percentage)

 Global efforts to promote access and benefit-sharing of genetic resources gains momentum
The world continues to make progress on implementing frameworks for the sustainable use of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge. The Nagoya Protocol to the Convention on Biological Diversity provides a transparent legal framework for the implementation of fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources. As of February 2022  132 countries and the European Union had ratified the Protocol  and 68 countries have devised at least one legislative  administrative or policy measure to ensure its implementation.
Also by that date  the number of contracting parties to the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture had grown to 148 from 135 in 2015. Seventy-nine countries have submitted a national report on the implementation of the Treatys provisions  a sizeable increase from 12 countries in 2016. In addition  the number of Standard Material Transfer Agreements has increased  from 55 352 in 2015 to 81 556 in 2022  indicating that more users are benefiting from the Treatys Multilateral System for research  breeding and training.

 The risk of species extinction continues to rise and is highest in Asia and small island developing States
The risk of species extinction is increasing at a rate unprecedented in human history. The Red List Index  which measures the overall extinction risk of species in selected taxonomic groups  reveals a deterioration of 9.2 per cent between 2000 and 2022. Wide variations are found among regions in both the overall prevalence of extinction risk and the rate of deterioration. Central and Southern Asia  Eastern and South-Eastern Asia  and small island developing States suffer from more severe risk and faster deterioration than the global average. The main drivers of these declines are the unsustainability of agriculture and the over-harvest of wild species. Human activities such as logging and farming are encroaching upon habitats  putting about 20 per cent of reptile species  for example  at risk. To conserve and sustainably use biodiversity  key actions are urgently needed  including reversing the net loss of habitat  transforming land management and transitioning to sustainable agriculture.
Red List Index of species survival  2000 and 2022
*Excluding Australia and New Zealand.

   Nearly half of areas identified as key for global biodiversity are under protection  though progress lags in four regions
  
Given the wide variation in the distribution of biodiversity and the threats to it around the planet  it is important that protected areas be located strategically. Safeguarding key biodiversity areas (KBAs) through the establishment of protected areas or other effective area-based conservation measures is helping prevent the rapid loss of biodiversity. Globally  the mean percentage coverage of KBAs by protected areas increased from over one quarter in 2000 to nearly one half in 2021. Despite this encouraging trend  the growth of coverage has slowed in recent years. Moreover  coverage is uneven. Four regions  Northern Africa and Western Asia Central and Southern Asia  Eastern and South-Eastern Asia  and Oceania  still have mean coverage of less than 35 per cent across marine  terrestrial  freshwater and mountain KBAs.
Mean proportion of freshwater  terrestrial and mountain KBAs covered by protected areas  20002021 (percentage)

 National planning processes are increasingly reflecting the value of biodiversity; still  progress is too slow
Biodiversity directly or indirectly contributes to the attainment of most SDGs. The number of countries incorporating ecosystem and biodiversity values into national accounting and reporting systems is steadily trending upwards. The majority of countries have established national targets in this regard  in accordance with the Aichi Biodiversity Target 22  of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 20112020. By January 2022  37 per cent of countries assessed are on track to achieve or exceed their national targets; 58 per cent have made progress towards their targets but at an insufficient rate; and 5 per cent reported that they are making no headway or moving away from their national targets. Despite important gains  Aichi Biodiversity Target 2 was not met by 2020. Building back better from COVID-19 is an opportunity to integrate biodiversity considerations into economic recovery measures to build a more sustainable future  while reducing the risk of future pandemics. However  this opportunity is not being seized. To date   biodiversity has been a largely neglected area in recovery spending.
Number of countries reporting different levels of progress towards national targets established in accordance with Aichi Biodiversity Target 2  by January 2022
*Excluding Australia and New Zealand.
2 Aichi Biodiversity Target 2: By 2020  at the latest  biodiversity values have been integrated into national and local development and poverty reduction strategies and planning processes and are being incorporated into national accounting  as appropriate  and reporting systems.
 Goal 14
  
 Home
  

    Goal 16  
