

    Forest area is still declining  but at a slower rate
  
 Between 2000 and 2015  forest area as a share of total land area decreased from 31.1 to 30.7 per cent. That represents the loss of more than 58 million hectares of forests  an area roughly the size of Kenya. Most of that loss occurred in the tropics  with the most sizable declines found in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa. Conversion of forest land for agricultural use  such as growing crops and raising livestock  is considered a key driver in forest loss. 
The loss of forests in some tropical regions is partly balanced out by an increase in forested land in many parts of Asia  as well as in Europe and Northern America. In those regions  active afforestation and landscape restoration  as well as the natural expansion of forests on abandoned agricultural land  have led to the growth of forested land.
 As a result  the net annual rate of forest loss in 2010 to 2015 was roughly 25 per cent slower than in 2000 to 2005. Moreover  the proportion of protected forest area and forests under long-term management plans remained stable or increased in all regions of the world.

        International agreements are forging innovative approaches to biodiversity conservation
    
Countries are making progress in adopting frameworks that incentivize the conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources and biodiversity through the sharing of benefits. Such resources include plants  animals  microbes and other genetic material and the traditional knowledge associated with them.
 As of 1 February 2019  the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization had been ratified by 116 contracting Parties  including the European Union (an increase of 65 per cent from 2016). As of that date  61 Parties had also adopted access and benefit-sharing (ABS) frameworks and published related information in the ABS Clearing-House (up from 6 in 2016). In addition  145 Parties had ratified the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. As part of the treaty  over 64 000 standard material transfer agreements have been concluded for the transfer of more than 4.6 million samples of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture globally.
