
SDG Goals
 
 
Protect  restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems  sustainably manage forests  combat desertification  and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss

             UN Photo/Louise Grubb
        
 Human activity continues to erode the health of ecosystems on which all species depend. The loss of forests is slowing but continues at an alarming rate; one million plant and animal species are at risk of extinction according to a recent United Nations report  and an estimated 20 per cent of the Earths land area was degraded between 2000 and 2015. Many countries are taking measures to conserve  restore and make sustainable use of those invaluable natural resources. They are adopting legal mechanisms to ensure the fair sharing of benefits from genetic resources  protecting more KBAs  and implementing sustainable forest management plans. But those efforts must be scaled upurgently. The severity of the situation requires immediate action and a fundamental transformation of our relationship with the Earth to halt biodiversity loss and protect ecosystems for the benefit of all.

  Accelerating levels of biodiversity loss demand an emergency response
 The loss of global biodiversity is accelerating  moving us closer towards unknown and irreversible changes to the Earths ecosystems. According to the Red List Index  which tracks data on more than 20 000 species of mammals  birds  amphibians  corals and cycads  the risk of species extinction has worsened by about 10 per cent over the last 25 years. The Index declined from 0.82 in 1993 to 0.74 in 2018. Further  the latest report of the Intergovernmental Science- Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services noted that biodiversity is declining faster than at any other time in human history. 
 The primary drivers of that assault are habitat loss from unsustainable agriculture  deforestation  unsustainable harvest and trade  climate change and alien invasive species. But even against such an ominous backdrop are numerous examples of species recovery following conservation interventions  including in small island developing States such as Fiji  Mauritius and the Seychelles. Accelerated action is needed to safeguard critically endangered species and mainstream extinction risk reduction across agriculture  industry  trade and other sectors.

            Red List Index of species survival  19932019  and projections for 20202030 (based on a business-as-usual extrapolation of the global indicator)
          
Show Data
Download to CSV

 Land degradation is affecting one fifth of the Earths land area and the lives of one billion people
 Twenty per cent of the Earths total land area was degraded between 2000 and 2015  resulting in a significant loss of services essential to human well-being. That estimate is relatively conservative given the underlying sub-indicators  which only represent three variables: changes in land cover  land productivity and organic carbon in soil. In all regions  except Europe and Northern America and Northern Africa and Western Asia  the extent of degradation covered 22.4 per cent to 35.5 per cent of land area  directly impacting the lives of over one billion people.
 Global trends in land cover indicate a net loss in natural and semi-natural classes of land due largely to human-induced processes  including desertification  deforestation  improper soil management  cropland expansion and urbanization. Significant declines were also observed in the productivity of land cover classes that remained unchanged  with grasslands incurring some of the greatest losses. 

          Proportion of degraded land from 2000 to 2015 (percentage)
      
** Including Australia  New Zealand and Papua New Guinea but excluding the islands of Oceania.
        *** Excluding Switzerland and the United States.
        
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Progress in protection of key biodiversity areas must accelerate to meet the 2030 target
 Protecting sites that are important for terrestrial  freshwater and mountain biodiversityKBAsis vital to ensuring the long-term and sustainable use of natural resources. While progress has been made since 2000 in protecting KBAs  the rate of progress has slowed significantly since 2010.
 The global mean percentage of each terrestrial  freshwater and mountain KBA covered by protected areas increased by more than 10 percentage points between 2000 and 2010. However  from 2010 to 2018  the coverage only increased by two to three percentage points. At the current rate  by 2030  less than 50 per cent of each KBA will be covered by protected areas at the global level  on average.

            Mean proportion of terrestrial  freshwater and mountain KBAs covered by protected areas  20002018 (percentage)
          
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Mountain ecosystems provide essential environmental services  but their health varies widely among regions
 Healthy mountain ecosystems are fundamental to the provision of ecosystem services to upland communities as well as lowland peoples living far from mountain peaks. For example  mountains are the source of 60 to 80 per cent of the worlds freshwater  which is used for domestic  agricultural and industrial consumption  green energy production and biodiversity conservation. Green coverage of mountain areas (by forests  grasslands/shrublands and croplands) is positively correlated to mountains state of health and  consequently  to their capacity to fulfil their ecosystem roles. 
 A global baseline of mountain area green coverage has now been established using 2017 data. That year  76 per cent of mountain areas globally were covered with vegetation: in Oceania  almost all mountain areas were covered  while in Northern Africa and Western Asia  the share was only 60 per cent.

            Proportion of mountain areas with green coverage  2017 (percentage)
          

          * Excluding Australia and New Zealand.
        
Show Data
Download to CSV

    Forest area is still declining  but at a slower rate
  
 Between 2000 and 2015  forest area as a share of total land area decreased from 31.1 to 30.7 per cent. That represents the loss of more than 58 million hectares of forests  an area roughly the size of Kenya. Most of that loss occurred in the tropics  with the most sizable declines found in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa. Conversion of forest land for agricultural use  such as growing crops and raising livestock  is considered a key driver in forest loss. 
The loss of forests in some tropical regions is partly balanced out by an increase in forested land in many parts of Asia  as well as in Europe and Northern America. In those regions  active afforestation and landscape restoration  as well as the natural expansion of forests on abandoned agricultural land  have led to the growth of forested land.
 As a result  the net annual rate of forest loss in 2010 to 2015 was roughly 25 per cent slower than in 2000 to 2005. Moreover  the proportion of protected forest area and forests under long-term management plans remained stable or increased in all regions of the world.

        International agreements are forging innovative approaches to biodiversity conservation
    
Countries are making progress in adopting frameworks that incentivize the conservation and sustainable use of genetic resources and biodiversity through the sharing of benefits. Such resources include plants  animals  microbes and other genetic material and the traditional knowledge associated with them.
 As of 1 February 2019  the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization had been ratified by 116 contracting Parties  including the European Union (an increase of 65 per cent from 2016). As of that date  61 Parties had also adopted access and benefit-sharing (ABS) frameworks and published related information in the ABS Clearing-House (up from 6 in 2016). In addition  145 Parties had ratified the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. As part of the treaty  over 64 000 standard material transfer agreements have been concluded for the transfer of more than 4.6 million samples of plant genetic resources for food and agriculture globally.
 Goal 14
  

    Goal 16  
