
SDG Goals
 
 
Protect  restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems  sustainably manage forests  combat desertification  and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss
A boy walks through Argentinas biodiverse terrain. The Sustainable Natural Resources Management project aims to improve management of forest resources and conserve biodiversity in protected areas and forest landscapes.
             The World Bank/Robert Davis
        
 Ending environmental decline and restoring our planet is fundamental to sustainable development. Nevertheless  forests are being cut down  biological diversity is declining  and terrestrial ecosystems are being degraded at alarming rates  with profound consequences for human survival and well-being. Land degradation now affects one fifth of the Earths land area. Wildlife trafficking threatens human health  economic development and security through the spread of zoonotic diseases (transmitted from animals to humans)  which now represent the majority of emerging infectious diseases. The COVID-19 pandemic has reminded us that by threatening biodiversity  humanity threatens its own survival.
 To address these challenges  considerable efforts are being made to expand sustainable forest management and to protect sites critical to biodiversity. Countries are also enacting legislation and accounting principles to make nature count and to address threats to biodiversity  such as the growing spread of invasive alien species. It is time to put the health of the planet at the centre of all our plans and policies.

  More than one quarter of the species assessed for the IUCN Red List are threatened with extinction
 Human activities are causing biodiversity to decline faster than at any other time in human history. The world has fallen short on its 2020 targets to halt biodiversity loss. The Red List Index of the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN)  which monitors the overall extinction risk for various species  shows a 10 per cent decline since 1993. Among 134 400 species assessed  28 per cent (more than 37 400 species) are threatened with extinction  including 41 per cent of amphibians  34 per cent of conifers  33 per cent of reef-building corals  26 per cent of mammals and 14 per cent of birds. The main drivers of species loss are agricultural and urban development; unsustainable harvesting through hunting  fishing  trapping and logging; and invasive alien species.
 Fortunately  conservation actions could stave off further species losses. For example  many bird and mammal species have benefited from invasive species control  conservation in zoos and other collections  and site protection. Since 1993  conservation actions have prevented the extinction of 21 to 32 species of birds and 7 to 16 species of mammals. Considering that 10 bird and 5 mammal species were confirmed or suspected to have been driven to extinction over this period  such actions have reduced extinction rates by three to four times compared with what would have been anticipated.

            Best estimates of the proportions of species threatened with extinction in the Red List Index  by species group  2021 (percentage)
          
Show Data
Download to CSV

 Progress to safeguard key biodiversity areas  essential for environmental sustainability  has stalled
 The protection of key biodiversity areas (KBAs) has long been considered a cornerstone of biodiversity conservation. In 2020  on average  43 per cent of each terrestrial KBA  42 per cent of each freshwater KBA and 41 per cent of each mountain KBA were within protected areas  an increase of around 13 to 14 percentage points since 2000. However  increases in coverage have plateaued over the last five years. On average  more than half of each KBA remains outside of protected areas.
 Carefully targeted policy interventions can safeguard KBAs and the communities that depend on them. In Cameroon  in August 2020  the Government cancelled a logging operation in the Ebo Forest  which makes up half of the Yabassi KBA. Ebo is a large intact forest system that is home to 12 species of plants found nowhere else on Earth. Animal inhabitants include gorillas  chimpanzees  forest elephants  Preusss red colobus monkeys and many others. Ebo Forest is also the ancestral land of more than 40 communities whose livelihoods are intertwined with the areas abundant and diverse natural resources.

 Sustainable forest management is gaining ground  but forest loss continues at an alarming rate
 Forests are repositories for most of the worlds biodiversity  covering 4.1 billion hectares of land. They help regulate the water cycle  mitigate climate change and are a direct source of food  income  shelter and energy for some 1.6 billion people. Sustainable forest management aims to maintain and enhance the economic  social and environmental value of all types of forests  for current and future generations. There was notable progress towards the sustainable management of the worlds forest from 20002010 to 20102020. The area of forest under certification increased or remained stable at the global level and in most regions  as did the proportion of forests in protected areas or under long-term management plans  and the above-ground forest biomass per hectare.
 Although the rate of decline has slowed  the loss of forests globally remains alarming. The proportion of forest area fell from 31.9 per cent of the worlds total land area in 2000 to 31.2 per cent in 2020. This translates to a net loss of almost 100 million hectares. The rate of forest loss has increased in South-Eastern Asia and Africa  and also in LDCs  landlocked developing countries and SIDS  mostly due to the conversion of forest to agricultural land. Deforestation and forest degradation remain monumental challenges  especially in the tropics. The continuing disappearance of forests signals the need for accelerated action to reduce deforestation  restore degraded lands and implement sustainable forest and land management practices. Such actions will also enhance the resilience of ecosystems to climate change  protect biodiversity and support rural livelihoods. 

          Progress towards sustainable forest management dashboard
      
Note: The annual forest area change rate is calculated using a compound annual change formula.

   Funding is needed to implement legislation adopted in almost all countries in response to invasive alien species
  
 Invasive alien species are animals  plants or other organisms introduced by humans into ecosystems outside their natural range  which have become established and negatively affect native biodiversity. Such species are a major driver of biodiversity loss and species extinction. They also negatively impact ecosystem services  human livelihoods and well-being  and economies. Invasive alien species are introduced to new areas either intentionally  by hunting or fishing  for example  or unintentionally  through a contaminant on traded goods  for instance  or as a hitchhiker on vehicles or boats. With the increased movement of people and goods around the world  the number of established alien species is expected to increase by 36 per cent between 2005 and 2050.
 Preventing the introduction of invasive alien species is the most cost-effective way to address their impacts  which are estimated to cost the global economy billions of dollars annually.   Governments are responding. Nearly all countries (98 per cent) now have national legislation to prevent or control invasive alien species  but the sectoral coverage of such legislation varies widely. Most countries have adopted legislation relevant to plant and animal health in agriculture (92 per cent and 82 per cent  respectively)  but fewer have legislation focused on the environment (42 per cent) or fisheries and aquaculture (27 per cent).
 Adequate resources are crucial to an effective response. However  only 55 per cent of countries have reported allocations from their national budgets to deal with invasive species  while only 37 per cent have accessed global financing mechanisms.
 Goal 14
  

    Goal 16  
