
SDG Goals
 
 
High-Level Political Forum Goals in Focus
Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable  reliable  sustainable and modern energy for all
Recent advances in sustainable energy are encouraging signs for ensuring access to affordable  reliable and modern energy for all. Access to electricity is outpacing population growth in many countries. In addition  energy efficiency continues to improve  which is offsetting carbon dioxide emissions  reducing energy demand and making energy more affordable. Although renewable energy in the electricity sector has advanced rapidly  accelerated progress is also needed in the areas of transport  heating and cooling. Despite some steps forward  41 per cent of the worlds population still lack access to clean cooking fuels and technologies. Overall  progress on Goal 7 remains too slow to be on track to meet the global energy targets for 2030.
Photo Credit :  UNDP Picture This/Kailash
Amount of individual renewable energy sources in total final energy consumption  2015 (millions of tons of oil equivalent)
Show Data
Download to CSV

      Faster uptake of modern forms of renewable energy is needed to meet an ambitious SDG target
    

      The share of renewables in final energy consumption increased modestly  from 17.3 per cent in 2014 to 17.5 per cent in 2015. Only 55 per cent of the renewable share was derived from modern forms of renewable energy. The remainder represents traditional uses of biomass (such as fuelwood and charcoal)  of which a significant proportion is used by the 3 billion people still using polluting cookstoves. In absolute terms  renewable energy consumption grew by 18 per cent from 2000 to 2015. In 2015  electricity accounted for half of the increase (mostly from wind and solar energy); the other half was mostly bioenergy for heat and transport. Based on the current trend  the share of renewable energy in total energy consumption is projected to reach just 21 per cent by 2030  falling short of the substantial increase called for in the SDG target.
    
Global primary energy intensity  20002015 (megajoules per 2011 US$ PPP)
Show Data
Download to CSV

      Low- and middle-income countries are seeing the fastest declines in energy intensity  outpacing richer countries
    

      Global energy intensitythe ratio of energy used per unit of GDPdecreased by 2.8 per cent in 2015  faster than in any year since 1990 and double the rate of improvement between 1990 and 2010. High-income countries showed consistent declines  but at a slower pace than low- and middle-income countries. Emerging economies in Asia and the Pacific and in Africa have now surpassed the global rate of improvement in energy intensity  but their intensity levels are higher than the world average. Among end-use sectors  industry made significant progress  reducing intensity by 4.2 per cent in 2015. To reach the SDG target  global energy intensity needs to improve at an annual rate of 2.7 per cent over the period 20162030  requiring sustained momentum and the systematic adoption of energy efficiency policies in countries that are falling behind.
    

Vast swaths of Africa and Asia are still without electricity  although progress is being made

      From 2000 to 2016  the proportion of the global population with access to electricity increased by almost ten percentage points  reaching 87 per cent. This was the first time since 1990 that the absolute number of people living without electricity dipped below the symbolic threshold of one billion. Substantial gains in access rates were achieved in rural areas  in part due to slower population growth  but also aided by an upswing in off-grid solar electricity. Still  access rates to electricity in rural areas (at 76 per cent) are much lower than in urban areas (97 per cent)  and rural residents make up 87 per cent of the global deficit in access.
The largest deficits in electricity are found in Southern Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. However  both regions have made substantial progress. From 2000 to 2016  the electricity access rate increased from 60 per cent to 86 per cent in Southern Asia and from 26 per cent
to 43 per cent in sub-Saharan Africa. Despite these promising developments  the outlook for electrification shows that the world is not yet on track to achieve universal access by 2030. Some
40 countries have met the target since 2010; another 98 countries will need to intensify their efforts to do so.
    
  

      A staggering 41 per cent of the global population still lack access to clean cooking fuels and technologies
    

      Over the period 20002016  1.4 billion people gained access to clean cooking fuels and technologies. However  these advancements were mostly offset by population growth during this period. In 2016  59 per cent of the population had access to clean cooking fuels and technologies  an increase of only 10 percentage points since 2000.

    

    The health and well-being of some 3 billion people are adversely impacted by the lack of clean cooking fuels. This is especially true for women and children  who are typically the main procurers and users of household energy. Sub-Saharan Africa  Oceania* and many parts of Asia have the largest populations using polluting fuels. In 2016  some 2.8 billion people still used solid fuels with inefficient stoves  leading to high levels of household air pollution. If current trends continue  2.3 billion people will continue to use traditional cooking methods in 2030. The solution lies in transitioning to cleaner fuels and technologies  like gas and electricity  and improvements in stove efficiency. Addressing issues of affordability  lack of consumer awareness about the benefits of clean cooking  and minimal financing for producers of clean cooking energy technologies are key to accelerating the rate of access to clean cooking.
    
Number of people with primary reliance on clean fuels  kerosene and solid fuels  2000  2005  2010 and 2016 (billions of people)
Note: Solid fuels include wood  coal  charcoal  dung and crop waste. Oceania* refers to Oceania excluding Australia and New Zealand.
Show Data
Download to CSV
 Goal 6
  

    Goal 11  
