
SDG Goals
 
 
Conserve and sustainably use the oceans  seas and marine resources for sustainable development

             Patrick J. Nagel
        
 Life depends on oceans. They make up the planets largest ecosystem covering more than two thirds of the Earths surface and provide billions of people with food and livelihoods. Oceans produce about half the oxygen we breathe  and act as a climate regulator  absorbing atmospheric heat and more than one quarter of man-made CO2. However  decades of increasing carbon emissions have led to a build-up of heat in the oceans and changes in their chemical composition. The resulting adverse effects of ocean acidification  climate change (including sea-level rise)  extreme weather events and coastal erosion exacerbate ongoing threats to marine and coastal resources from overfishing  pollution and habitat degradation. Protected areas and policies and treaties that encourage responsible extraction of ocean resources are critical to confronting these threats. 

Land-based pollutants and marine debris threaten coastal habitats  but improvements in water quality are achievable
 Coastal areas worldwide are affected by land-based pollutants  including sewage and nutrient runoff  leading to coastal eutrophication  degraded water quality and the impairment of coastal marine ecosystems. Analysis of the clean water indicator  a measurement of the degree of ocean pollution  shows that water quality challenges are widespread  but are most acute in some equatorial zones  especially in parts of Asia  Africa and Central America.
 Nearly all countries have room to improve their coastal water quality. Analysis of trends from 2012 to 2018 shows that positive change is indeed possible: 104 of 220 coastal regions improved their coastal water quality over that period. Such improvements require policy commitments at the country level to expand access to wastewater treatment and to reduce chemical and nutrient runoff from agricultural sources  along with global commitments to reduce plastic debris. 
Clean water scores for 220 coastal regions  assessed on a scale of 0 (very polluted) to 100 (clean) 

Increasing acidification is threatening marine life and hampering the oceans role in moderating climate change
 The uptake of atmospheric CO2 by the ocean changes the chemical composition of seawater  altering its carbonate chemistry and resulting in a decrease of pH (and growing ocean acidification). Observations of ocean pH over the past 30 years have shown a decrease in surface pH of 0.1 units. This is equivalent to a 26 per cent increase in acidity from pre-industrial times. At the current rate of CO2 emissions  an increase in acidity of 100 to 150 per cent by the end of this century is predicted. 
 Ocean acidification threatens organisms as well as ecosystem services  including food security  by endangering fisheries and aquaculture. It also impacts coastal protection (by weakening coral reefs  which shield the coastline)  transportation and tourism. As the acidity of the ocean rises  its capacity to absorb CO2 from the atmosphere decreases  hampering the oceans role in moderating climate change. 
Atmospheric and seawater CO2 concentrations  and seawater pH in the North Pacific  19582017 (parts per million (ppm)  micro-atmospheres [atm] and pH)
Note: Atmospheric CO2 measured at Mauna Loa  Hawaii. Seawater CO2 and pH measured at Station Aloha  Hawaii. Data from NOAA PMEL Carbon Program  available from www.pmel.noaa.gov/co2.

The extent of marine protected areas has doubled since 2010  but more must be done to safeguard key biodiversity areas
 Protected areas play a critical role in sustainable development if they are both effectively managed and located in areas important for biodiversity. As of December 2018  17 per cent of waters under national jurisdiction were covered by protected areas. This is a significant increase from 12 per cent in 2015 and more than double the coverage level in 2010. The mean percentage of marine key biodiversity areas (KBAs) covered by protected areas also increased from 31.2 per cent in 2000 to 45.7 per cent in 2018.
 Despite that progress  the rate at which KBAs are being protected has slowed and  if current trends continue  will flatten by 2030. Developing countries  in particular LDCs and small island developing States  are lagging behind. A redoubling of efforts is needed to establish new marine protected areas and to strengthen the management of existing ones. 
Mean percentage area of each important site (KBA) for marine biodiversity that is covered by protected areas  2000  2010 and 2018 (percentage)
Show Data
Download to CSV

The decline in fish stocks appears to have stabilized; now they need to be rebuilt  especially in severely depleted regions
 To preserve the health and productivity of fisheries  fish stocks must be maintained within biologically sustainable levels. Overfishing not only reduces food production  but also impairs the functioning of ecosystems and reduces biodiversity  with negative repercussions for the economy and society. Worldwide  the proportion of marine fish stocks that are within biologically sustainable levels declined from 90 per cent in 1974 to 67 per cent in 2015. However  this decreasing trend appears to have stabilized since 2008an encouraging sign. 
 In 2015  the Mediterranean and Black Sea region had the lowest percentage of sustainable fish stocks (37.8 per cent)  followed closely by the Southeast Pacific region (38.5 per cent). In contrast  the Eastern Central Pacific and Northeast Pacific regions had the highest proportion of fish stocks at biologically sustainable levels (above 85 per cent). More focused efforts are needed to rebuild overfished stocks  particularly in severely depleted regions. 
Proportion of fish stocks within biologically sustainable levels  by marine region  2015 (percentage)
Show Data
Download to CSV

    States have taken important steps to combat illegal  unreported and unregulated fishing
    
 Illegal  unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing remains one of the greatest threats to marine ecosystems. Ruthless poaching in fisheries often leads to their collapse  threatening livelihoods and exacerbating poverty and food insecurity. Small-scale fisheries in developing countries are particularly vulnerable. Countries have developed a range of international instruments to combat illegal fishing within a global framework to address fisheries management. The first international binding agreement developed expressly to combat IUU fishing  the Agreement on Port State Measures  entered into force in June 2016. As of March 2019  59 States and one member organizationthe European Union representing its 28 member States were Parties to it. Worldwide implementation of the Agreement  supported by effective monitoring  control and surveillance  and supplemented by market access and trade measures  will boost international efforts to curb IUU fishing. 

      Most countries have frameworks to address the needs of small-scale fisheries; the next critical stage is their implementation
    
 Almost all countries have small-scale fisheries  and they account for more than half of total production in developing countries  both in terms of quantity and value. Approximately 120 million workers worldwide97 per cent of whom live in developing countries depend directly on the value chains of commercial capture fisheries for their livelihoods. Women constitute nearly half of that workforce. Despite their critical contributions to nutrition  food security and local livelihoods  many small-scale fishing communities continue to be marginalized.
 To help fisherfolk access productive resources  services and markets  most countries have developed targeted regulatory and institutional frameworks. Many countries have implemented those frameworks to a high degree  but more than one fifth of countries  particularly in Oceania and Central and Southern Asia  report a low to medium level of implementation. 

    To help fisherfolk access productive resources  services and markets  most countries have developed targeted regulatory and institutional frameworks. Many countries have implemented these to a high degree  but more than one fifth of countries  particularly in Oceania and Central and Southern Asia  report a low to medium level of implementation.
    
 Goal 13
  

    Goal 15  
