

    When effectively managed and well-resourced  marine protected areas are important mechanisms for safeguarding ocean life. In 2017  protected areas cover 13.2 per cent of the marine environment under national jurisdiction (up to 200 nautical miles from shore)  0.25 per cent of the marine environment beyond national jurisdiction  and 5.3 per cent of the total global ocean area. Globally  marine protected areas have expanded substantially since 2000  when only 1.7 per cent of global marine areas were protected. This growth is due to the creation of new sites  expansion of existing sites and contributions of several large-scale additions. Much of the increase over the last few years was due to these large additional sites  particularly off the coasts of Australia  Chile  New Zealand  Palau and the United States  among others.
    

    To achieve the desired long-term benefits of protecting nature  these protected areas must safeguard important sites for biodiversity. An example of such areas is key biodiversity areas (KBAs). Globally  the average coverage of marine KBAs by protected areas has risen from 32 per cent in 2000 to 45 per cent in 2017  an increase of more than 40 per cent. Coverage of marine KBAs by protected areas is highest in Australia and New Zealand (69 per cent) and Europe and Northern America (57 per cent). It is lowest in the small island developing States (22 per cent) and Northern Africa and Western Asia (23 per cent).
    
Proportion of marine areas within national jurisdiction (0-200 nautical miles) covered by protected areas  2017 (percentage)
Note: The global map is for illustrative purposes only and does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever concerning the legal status of any country or territory  or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Average proportion of each important site (KBA) for marine biodiversity that is covered by protected areas  2000 and 2017 (percentage)
Note: Figures for each region are calculated as the proportion of each KBA covered by protected areas  averaged across all KBAs within the region. Oceania* refers to Oceania excluding Australia and New Zealand.
Show Data
Download to CSV
