
Achieving Goal 14 requires the implementation of international instruments  through legal and institutional frameworks  for the conservation and sustainable use of oceans in a cross-sectoral and integrated manner. While progress has been made  implementation varies among the instruments  highlighting the need for renewed effort and increased support.
1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and its implementing agreements
To date  168 Parties (including the European Union) have ratified or acceded to UNCLOS. In addition  Member States have also ratified or acceded to its implementing agreements (150 Parties for the 1994 Part XI Agreement and 91 Parties for the 1995 United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement). A large number of States Parties to these treaties have taken steps to implement them through legal  policy and institutional frameworks. However  the extent of ratification  accession and implementation varies by country. Data collected in 2021 from 45 States and the European Union show that in terms of ratification and accession  84 per cent of the countries score very high or high  and 16 per cent score low or very low; with regard to implementation  69 per cent score very high or high  12 per cent score medium  and 19 per cent score low or very low. Effectively implementing UNCLOS and its implementing agreements requires understanding existing bottlenecks for countries. Targeted and sustained capacity-development initiatives  particularly for developing countries  are key to removing such obstacles.
Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent  Deter and Eliminate Illegal  Unreported and Unregulated Fishing
Fisheries resources are frequently poached  leading to the collapse of local fisheries and undermining efforts to manage fisheries sustainably. Part of the framework developed over the past decades to combat illegal  unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing includes the Agreement on Port State Measures  the first binding international agreement that specifically targets IUU fishing. The Agreement came into force in 2016 and currently includes 66 Parties (including the European Union). Its objective is to prevent  deter and eliminate IUU fishing by preventing vessels engaged in it from using ports and landing their catches. Between 2018 and 2020  the average degree of implementation of international instruments to combat IUU fishing improved  with the global composite measure rising from 3/5 to 4/5 over this period. This slight improvement in the global trend helps bring the target of eliminating IUU fishing closer to being met. However  more concerted efforts are needed.
Voluntary Guidelines for Securing Sustainable Small-Scale Fisheries in the Context of Food Security and Poverty Eradication
The Voluntary Guidelines are an internationally agreed instrument that promotes improved governance of small-scale fisheries  including in value chains  post-harvest operations and trade. About half of countries worldwide have adopted specific initiatives to support small-scale fishers. Such fishers contribute about half of global fish catches in developing countries and employ more than 90 per cent of the worlds capture fishers and fish workers  about half of whom are women. These small-scale fishing communities are largely marginalized and tend to have limited or disadvantaged access to resources and markets. The situation is compounded by the COVID-19 crisis  which has triggered reduced global demand and transportation restrictions.
Since 2015  most regions have expanded the adoption of regulatory frameworks that support small-scale fisheries and promote participatory decision-making. Globally  the average composite score for implementation of these frameworks improved from 3/5 to 4/5 between 2018 and 2020. At the regional level  Northern Africa and Western Asia reflects this leap  while Central and Southern Asia reduced its regional score from 3/5 to 2/5  highlighting the need for redoubled efforts. While countries commitment is gaining traction  increased support for small-scale fishers is critical in light of the coronavirus pandemic.
Degree of implementation of international instruments to promote and protect small-scale fisheries  20182020
Average level of implementation: 1= lowest to 5= highest
Show Data
Download to CSV
