
 Accelerated action is needed to support small-scale fishers  many of whose livelihoods collapsed under the pandemic  
 Almost half a billion people depend at least partially on small-scale fisheries  which account for 90 per cent of employment in fisheries worldwide. Almost all small-scale fishers (97 per cent) live in developing countries and many face high levels of poverty and lack broader social and economic development opportunities. Since 2015  efforts to provide small-scale fishers with access to marine resources and markets have expanded in most regions. The average global composite score  measuring enabling frameworks  concrete actions of support and participation in decision-making by small-scale fishers - rose to an average implementation level of 5 out of 5 in 2022  improving from 3 out of 5 in 2018. Current challenges include improving reporting rates and accelerating progress in light of the disproportionate impacts of COVID-19 on small-scale fishing communities. In many locales  fishers were unable to catch  process or sell fish for long periods due to pandemic-related restrictions and collapsing markets. 
 Restoring fish stocks  and incomes  through traditional knowledge 
 In the village of Menarbu  in Indonesia  people are entirely dependent on the sea for their livelihoods since they are unable to grow vegetables for sale outside of their community. Yohanis Ayamisebahe  a local fisher  has a boat equipped with an outboard motor on which he transports his fishing lines  snorkel and kalawai (spear). In 2018  after noticing that conditions in the sea and fish stocks were deteriorating  his village introduced an indigenous community-based coastal resource management system called sasi. Since it was established  Mr. Ayamisebahe says that fish stocks are thriving and incomes rising. This traditional system  which dates back generations  is premised on the balance between people and their environment. It seeks to protect the coastal marine ecosystem through a prescribed set of rules  including when different species of fish can be harvested. The challenge for the community now lies in finding nearby outlets for their products  since the market is very far and gasoline is expensive. 
