

    Oceans absorb up to 30 per cent of the annual emissions of CO2 generated by human activity  helping mitigate the rise in greenhouse gases. However  this benefit comes at a steep ecological cost: the absorbed CO2 alters the carbonate chemistry of the waters  leading to an increase in the acidity of seawater (reduced pH) and a decrease of the aragonite saturation state. These changing conditions can lead to significant weakening of the shells and skeletons of many marine species (such as reef-building corals and shelled molluscs  which use aragonite to build their shells). These effects threaten the resilience of marine ecosystems  particularly corals  and could potentially put the marine food web at risk.
    

    Studies at open ocean and coastal sites around that world have
    revealed that current levels of marine acidity have increased on
    average by about 26 per cent since the start of the Industrial
    Revolution (pH reduction of 0.1) and that marine life is exposed to
    conditions outside previously experienced natural variability at all
    study locations around the world. In some regions  the changes are
    amplified by natural processes such as upwelling (often cold  CO2
    and nutrient-rich water from the deep sea rising towards the surface) 
    resulting in conditions outside biologically relevant thresholds.
    

    As atmospheric CO2 levels increase  estimates indicate that oceans could be nearly 150 per cent more acidic by 2100  resulting in a
    pH reduction of up to 0.4. While the magnitude of carbon input is
    important  more stressful is the speed at which ocean acidification is
    occurringfaster than at any time since the last ice age. It could take
    tens of thousands of years for the ocean pH to return to conditions
    established before industrialization. Without sufficient time to buffer
    the consequences of ocean acidification  the severity and speed of
    change increase the risks for ocean health.
    
