

    States have taken important steps to combat illegal  unreported and unregulated fishing
    
 Illegal  unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing remains one of the greatest threats to marine ecosystems. Ruthless poaching in fisheries often leads to their collapse  threatening livelihoods and exacerbating poverty and food insecurity. Small-scale fisheries in developing countries are particularly vulnerable. Countries have developed a range of international instruments to combat illegal fishing within a global framework to address fisheries management. The first international binding agreement developed expressly to combat IUU fishing  the Agreement on Port State Measures  entered into force in June 2016. As of March 2019  59 States and one member organizationthe European Union representing its 28 member States were Parties to it. Worldwide implementation of the Agreement  supported by effective monitoring  control and surveillance  and supplemented by market access and trade measures  will boost international efforts to curb IUU fishing. 

      Most countries have frameworks to address the needs of small-scale fisheries; the next critical stage is their implementation
    
 Almost all countries have small-scale fisheries  and they account for more than half of total production in developing countries  both in terms of quantity and value. Approximately 120 million workers worldwide97 per cent of whom live in developing countries depend directly on the value chains of commercial capture fisheries for their livelihoods. Women constitute nearly half of that workforce. Despite their critical contributions to nutrition  food security and local livelihoods  many small-scale fishing communities continue to be marginalized.
 To help fisherfolk access productive resources  services and markets  most countries have developed targeted regulatory and institutional frameworks. Many countries have implemented those frameworks to a high degree  but more than one fifth of countries  particularly in Oceania and Central and Southern Asia  report a low to medium level of implementation. 

    To help fisherfolk access productive resources  services and markets  most countries have developed targeted regulatory and institutional frameworks. Many countries have implemented these to a high degree  but more than one fifth of countries  particularly in Oceania and Central and Southern Asia  report a low to medium level of implementation.
    
