
SDG Goals
 
 
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans  seas and marine resources for sustainable development

  Oceans  seas and other marine resources are essential to human well-being and social and economic development worldwide. Their conservation and sustainable use are central to achieving the 2030 Agenda  especially for small island developing States. Marine resources are particularly important for people living in coastal communities  who represented 37 per cent of the world population in 2010. Oceans provide livelihoods  subsistence and benefits from fisheries  tourism and other sectors. They also help regulate the global ecosystem by absorbing heat and carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere. However  oceans and coastal areas are extremely vulnerable to environmental degradation  overfishing  climate change and pollution.
  

The downward trend in sustainable fish stocks has slowed and appears to have stabilized

    Fisheries contribute significantly to global food security  livelihoods and the economy. However  if not sustainably managed  fishing can damage fish habitats  reduce biodiversity and impair the functioning of ecosystems with negative repercussions for sustainable social and economic development. To achieve a healthy balance  fish stocks must be maintained within biologically sustainable limitsat or above the abundance level that can produce the maximum sustainable yield. Based on an analysis of assessed stocks  the proportion of world marine fish stocks within biologically sustainable levels declined from 90 per cent in 1974 to 69 per cent in 2013 and appears to have stabilized over the last few years.
    
Proportion of fish stocks within biologically sustainable limits  1974-2013 (percentage)
Show Data
Download to CSV

Coverage of coastal and marine areas under protection has increased fourfold since 2000

    Protecting biodiverse marine sites is vital for ensuring the sustainability of marine biodiversity and ecosystem services. In 2014  8.4 per cent of the marine environment under national jurisdiction (up to 200 nautical miles from shore) and 0.25 per cent of the marine environment beyond national jurisdiction were under protection. Both developed and developing regions increased their protection of marine areas from 2000 to 2014. However  much of the increase was due to the establishment of large protected areas around a few countries and in sites not necessarily targeted for biodiversity. Consequently  marine protected areas are not evenly distributed  and the differences across regions are significant. In Oceania  the share of protected marine and coastal areas grew from 0.1 per cent in 2000 to 7.4 per cent in 2014the largest percentage among developing regions. To ensure that marine habitats and species are not lost  these protected areas need to be effectively managed and cover key biodiversity areas  which are sites significant for the global persistence of biodiversity. From 2000 to 2016  the share of marine key biodiversity areas that were completely covered by protected areas increased from 15 per cent to 19 per cent.
    
Proportion of coastal and marine areas protected  2000 and 2014 (percentage)
Show Data
Download to CSV

Important marine ecosystems supporting over 780 million people are at very high
risk of coastal eutrophication

    Coastal regions are particularly vulnerable to pollution. Since river basins  marine ecosystems and the atmosphere are all part of hydrological systems  the effects of pollution are often felt far from their source. In many coastal communities  pollution and eutrophicationexcessive nutrients in water  frequently due to runoff from land  causing dense plant and algal growth and the death of animal life from lack of oxygenhave been key factors driving detrimental changes. According to the Transboundary Waters Assessment Programme global comparative assessment in 2016  the five large marine ecosystems most at risk from coastal eutrophication are the Bay of Bengal  East China Sea  Gulf of Mexico  North Brazil Shelf and South China Sea  areas which provided ecosystem services for coastal populations of 781 million in 2010.
    
Nutrient risk indicator categories of large marine ecosystems
Note: Global map is for illustrative purposes only and does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever concerning the legal status of any country or territory  or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
 Goal 13
  

    Goal 15  
