
SDG Goals
 
 
Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all
A boy learns through a Radio Education in Emergencies programme. For two years  starting in mid-2017  more than 9 200 schools closed across eight African countries due to rising insecurity  leaving 1.9 million children without education.
             UNICEF/Tanya Bindra
        
COVID19 has wreaked havoc worldwide on childrens learning and well-being. Before the pandemic  progress in education was already too slow to achieve Goal 4 by 2030. One year into the crisis  two in three students were still affected by full or partial school closures. One hundred million more children than before fail to demonstrate basic reading skills. The poorest and most vulnerable children are bearing the brunt of the crisis  exacerbating longstanding inequalities. Many risk never returning to school; some are forced into child marriage or child labour. Special efforts are required to recover learning losses caused by COVID-19. However  an estimated 65 per cent of Governments in low- and lower-middle-income countries  and 35 per cent in upper-middle- and high-income countries have reduced funding for education since the onset of the pandemic. 

    Exceptional measures are needed to get students back on track after a catastrophic year for education
 
Even before COVID-19  the world was not on track to meet reading and mathematics targets. In 2019  only 59 per cent of children of grade three age were proficient in reading. The pandemic is projected to cause an additional 101 million children (roughly 9 per cent of those in primary and lower secondary school) to fall below the minimum reading proficiency threshold  increasing the total number of students falling behind to 584 million in 2020. This wipes out the progress achieved in education over the past 20 years. Similar declines are observed in the area of mathematics.
Nearly two thirds of the children falling behind live in Central and Southern Asia and Eastern and South-Eastern Asia. The proficiency rate was already very low in sub-Saharan Africa before the pandemic  so learning losses in this region would likely occur among children below the minimum level of proficiency. Recovery of the learning deficit globally could occur by 2024  but only if extraordinary efforts are made.

        Change in reading proficiency for grades one to eight  from 2019 to 2020 (percentage and millions of children)
      
Show Data
Download to CSV
Note: Values in parentheses represent the number of children falling below the proficiency threshold in 2020.

      Large disparities in school completion are likely to get worse  especially among poor or vulnerable children
    
Progress to ensure that all children complete primary and secondary school has been slow.  Between 2010 and 2019  the global primary and secondary school completion rates increased from 82 per cent to 85 per cent and from 46 per cent to 53 per cent  respectively. In sub-Saharan Africa  the primary completion rate rose from 57 per cent in 2010 to 64 per cent in 2019  while the secondary rate grew from 26 per cent to 29 per cent  leaving that region furthest behind. 
Large disparities among population groups remain pervasive. Almost half of countries with data did not reach gender parity in primary school completion. Disparities by location and wealth are even more stark: only a third of countries reached parity in primary school completion between rural and urban students  and just one sixth of countries reached parity between students in the poorest and richest households. The pandemic is expected to further slow or even reverse progress in education completion. Growing poverty and the shift to remote learning make children from the poorest households and other vulnerable groups less equipped to participate and more likely to drop out permanently or for extended periods.

          Secondary school completion rate  2010 and 2019 (percentage)
        
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Good progress in early childhood education has been brought to a halt by the pandemic
Pre-COVID-19 data for 20122020 drawn from 76 mostly low- and middle-income countries and territories show that around 7 in 10 children aged 3 and 4 years are developmentally on track. Participation in organized pre-primary learning (one year before the official age for primary school entry) rose steadily before the pandemic  from 65 per cent in 2010 to 73 per cent in 2019  with gender parity achieved in every region. However  considerable variation was found among regions. Participation in early learning in 2019 was 43 per cent in sub-Saharan Africa  compared with 96 per cent in Latin American and the Caribbean. This progress has been threatened since 2020  since childcare and early education facilities have closed in most countries. Many young children are now entirely reliant on their parents or other caregivers at home. Unsafe conditions  negative interactions with caregivers  and lack of adequate stimulation and learning opportunities during the early years can diminish childrens chances of success throughout their lives.
    

          Participation rate in organized learning one year before the official entry age for primary school  2010 and 2019 (percentage)
        
Show Data
Download to CSV
Note: Data for Southern Asia and 2010 data for Oceania* and Eastern and South-Eastern Asia are not shown due to low population coverage of available data.

    Broader participation in continuing education and training is needed to create more resilient and adaptable workers
 
Continuing education and training are key to improved livelihoods and to developing a labour force resilient to economic shocks and adaptable to technological change. Prior to the pandemic  the average participation rate of youth and adults in formal and non-formal education was only 25 per cent  with significant variation across the 73 countries with data. In nearly half of them  participation rates were below 10 per cent  but were 40 per cent and above among countries in Europe and Northern America. Gender parity in participation rates was achieved in less than a fifth of the countries.
With schools and workspaces transitioning online due to COVID-19  information and communication (ICT) skills have become critically important. However  available data from 20172019  indicate that less than 40 per cent of youth and adults reported performing one of the basic ICT skills in the last three months  such as sending an email with an attachment. Large differences in skill levels are found among various groups and occupations  but relatively smaller gender differences  especially at younger ages.
  

      Proportion of youth and adults with basic ICT skills  latest year available in 20172019 (percentage)
    
Building back better from the crisis can start with basic school infrastructure  which is sorely lacking in many countries
 Improving basic school infrastructure is critical for school reopening  a first step on the road to recovery from COVID-19. Data from 2016 to 2019 show that  globally  more than a fifth of primary schools lacked access to basic drinking water or single-sex toilets  more than a third lacked basic handwashing facilities  and one in four did not have electricity. Internet service and computers in schools are even more scarce. Schools in LDCs face the biggest challenges. Almost half of primary schools in LDCs lack single-sex toiletsan important factor in girls attendanceand more than two thirds are without electricity. The pandemic is spotlighting the importance of adequate sanitation facilities in keeping children safe at school and the need for ICT infrastructure to support remote learning. It is also highlighting additional infrastructure considerations  such as adequate classroom space  air filtration in school buildings  and access to the Internet and computers at home. The economic fallout of the crisis on education budgets and capital spending is likely to affect the ability of countries to make progress towards these ends  especially in the poorest countries.
  

          Proportion of schools with basic infrastructure  20162019 (latest) (percentage)
        
Show Data
Download to CSV
 Goal 3
  

    Goal 5  
