
SDG Goals
 
 
Goal 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong opportunities for all

    Goal 4 aims to ensure that all people have access to quality education and lifelong learning opportunities. The Goal focuses on the acquisition of foundational and higher-order skills at all stages of education and development; greater and more equitable access to quality education at all levels as well as technical and vocational education and training (TVET); and the knowledge  skills and values needed to function well and contribute to society.
  

  Children are less likely to attend school if they live in rural areas  are poor or have parents with little or no education
   

  Despite progress  the world failed to meet the MDG of  universal primary education by 2015. In 2013  the latest  year for which data are available  59 million children of primary school age and 65 million adolescents of lower secondary age were out of school. Most of them were girls. Survey data from 63 low- and middle-income countries between 2008 and 2012 show that children of primary school age from the poorest 20 per cent of households were more than four times as likely to be out of school as their richest peers. Children  especially girls  from households headed by someone with less than a primary education were more than four times as likely to be out of school as children from households headed by someone with a secondary or higher education.    

      Proportion of out-of-school children of primary-school age in selected countries  by sex  location  household wealth  and education of the household head  2008-2012 (percentage)
      

      Note: Data are based on nationally representative household surveys from 63 low- and middle-income countries between 2008 and 2012.
      
Show Data
Download to CSV

      Fundamental skills provide a solid foundation to young people for further learning throughout their life
    
Quality education should lead to the acquisition of fundamental skills  such as literacy and numeracy  and higher level skills. The end of lower secondary school often coincides with the end of compulsory education. By this stage  students should be able to master subject-related knowledge and skills  possess personal and social skills and have a solid foundation for further learning throughout life. Data from 38 countries in the developed regions show that  in the majority of these countries  at least 75 per cent of young people achieved at least minimum proficiency in reading and/or mathematics; the same was true for only 5 of the 22 countries with data in developing regions.  

        Proportion of young people at the end of lower secondary education achieving at least minimum levels of proficiency in reading and mathematics  selected countries in developing and developed regions  2012 (percentage)
        
Show Data
Download to CSV

      More than half of children aged 3 and 4 in selected countries are developmentally on track in physical  learning and psycho-social well-being
    

    Early childhood development is multidimensional  encompassing several aspects of a childs well-being: physical  social  emotional and mental. Despite variations in the pace and rate at which children develop  all children have an inherent right to develop to their fullest potential.   In 54 of 58 countries with available data for the period 20092015  at least half of children aged 3 and 4 were developmentally on track in at least three of the following domains: literacy-numeracy  physical development  social-emotional development  and learning.
    

        Proportion of children aged 36-59 months who are developmentally on track in at least three of the following domains: literacy-numeracy  physical development  social-emotional development and learning  2009-2015 (percentage)
        

      Note:  Data are available for 58 countries for the period 2009-2015 covering 18 per cent of the worlds population. The number of countries in each region with available data is in parentheses.
      
Show Data
Download to CSV
Increasing access to learning opportunities throughout life 
 Education for sustainable development and global citizenship addresses pressing and overarching requirements of society: living together and the relationship with nature. These are critical avenues for a sustainable and peaceful future for all.
Equitable access to TVET and higher education is also promoted. Although enrolments in TVET in upper secondary rose by one-third between 2000 and 2013  the share of TVET fell from 26 per cent to 22 per cent. Tertiary education has expanded rapidly over the same period with enrolments doubling globally and increasing by 2.5 times in developing regions with almost equal numbers of men and women enrolled. However  worldwide  in 2013  there were still 757 million adults unable to read and write  of whom two-thirds were women.
 Goal 3
  

    Goal 5  
