
SDG Goals
 
 
Reduce inequality within and among countries

             The World Bank/Tanvir Murad Topu
        
 Despite some positive signs  such as lower income inequality in some countries and preferential trade status for lower-income countries  inequality in its various forms persists. The COVID-19 crisis is making inequality worse. It is hitting the most vulnerable people hardest  and those same groups are often experiencing increased discrimination. The wider effects of the pandemic will likely have a particularly damaging impact on the poorest countries. If a global recession leads to reduced flows of development resources  that impact will be even more severe. 

  While real incomes of the poorest within countries are rising  the rich still prosper disproportionately
 Leaving no one behind means that those with lower incomes are able to benefit and participate in a countrys broader economic growth. Progress towards shared prosperity can be measured through the growth of household income (or consumption) of the poorest 40 per cent of a countrys population. In 73 of the 90 countries with comparable data during the period 2012 to 2017  this group experienced real income growth. Furthermore  in more than half of those countries (49)  the bottom 40 per cent experienced income growth higher than the overall national average  indicating lower levels of inequality. Still  in all countries with data  the bottom 40 per cent of the population received less than 25 per cent of the overall income  while the richest 10 per cent received at least 20 per cent of total income. 
Progress in shared prosperity has been strongest in Eastern and South-Eastern Asia  with the bottom 40 per cent of the population growing annually by 4.9 per cent  on average. Growth in sub-Saharan African countries has been more limited  although comparison is challenging due to limited data (available for 15 countries only). The need for improved data collection is particularly pertinent now  so that countries are able to identify and take action if the poorest are disproportionately affected by the economic impacts of COVID-19.
 
Annualized per capita growth rate of income of the poorest 40 per cent of the population  20122017 (percentage)

      Women with disabilities face multiple  and intersecting  forms of discrimination
    
 Almost two in ten people reported having personally experienced discrimination on at least one of the grounds established by international human rights law  according to data from 31 countries over the period 2014 to 2019. Moreover  women are more likely to be victims of discrimination than men. Among those with disabilities  3 in 10 personally experienced discrimination  with higher levels still among women with disabilities. The main grounds of discrimination mentioned by these women was not the disability itself  but religion  ethnicity and sex  pointing to the urgent need for measures to tackle multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination. The COVID-19 pandemic may further entrench existing patterns of discrimination and stigma  with reports emerging from many countries of discrimination against different groups. 

      Workers are receiving a smaller share of the output they helped produce
    
 In 2017  the labour income of the worlds workers represented an estimated 51 per cent of global GDP. The labour share of GDP takes into account the employment-related earnings of both employees and the self-employed  and provides an indication of whether higher national income will lead to increased material living standards for workers. The global labour income share has shown a downward trend since 2004  when it stood at 54 per cent  implying that workers are receiving a smaller proportion of the output they helped produce. 
The labour income share varies considerably from one region to the other. In 2017  the labour income of workers in Northern Africa and Western Asia accounted for a little over a third of the regions output (36 per cent). At the other end of the spectrum  the labour income share was close to 58 per cent in Europe and Northern America.

      Income inequality is falling in some countries  but levels generally remain high
    
 The Gini index is one of the most commonly used measures of income inequality. It ranges between 0 and 100  where 0 indicates that income is shared equally among all people and 100 indicates the extreme situation where one person accounts for all income. Among the 84 countries with available data  the Gini index for disposable income (or consumption expenditure) fell by at least one point in 38 countries between 2010 and 2017  meaning those countries saw a reduction in inequality. However  income inequality rose over the same period in 25 of the countries with available data. 
Despite falling inequality in the vast majority of countries with a Gini index value in excess of 40 in 2010  levels of income inequality remain high in many countries. Out of 166 countries with data  65 still had a Gini index value of over 40 in their most recent values  with 17 having an index value greater than 50. The lowest levels of income inequality were seen in Slovenia and the Czech Republic  with Gini index values below 25.
Gini index for disposable income (or consumption expenditure) by country  around 2010 and 2017
Note:  If data for a reference year are not available  the nearest year within a two-year window are presented.
Show Data
Download to CSV

  The global recession could constrict aid flows to developing countries
 In 2018  total resource flows for development to developing countries from Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development donors  multilateral agencies and other key providers totalled $271 billion in current prices  compared with $420 billion the previous year and $314 billion in 2015. ODA made up 61 per cent ($166 billion) of the total. The region that received the largest share of total resource flows was Latin America and the Caribbean ($59 billion)  although this amount fell considerably from 2015 ($97 billion). Flows to Eastern and South-Eastern Asia rose slightly in nominal terms  from $50 billion in 2015 to $56 billion in 2018.
 Looking ahead  the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development projects a decline in global GDP of up to 7.6 per cent in 2020 if there is a second wave of COVID-19 infections  which could put pressure on Development Assistance Committee members ODA budgets. Development resource flows fell in the aftermath of the 2008 economic and financial crisis  and the global recession could again put pressure on development resources. 
Total resource flows for development to developing countries  by region of recipient  2015 and 2018 (billions of current dollars)
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Most regions still have a long way to go in establishing adequate migration policies
 Globally  54 per cent of countries have a comprehensive set of policy measures to facilitate orderly  safe  regular and responsible migration and mobility of people  based on 111 countries with available data in September 2019. This means that they reported having policy measures in place for at least 80 per cent of the subcategories that make up the six policy domains of this indicator. Central and Southern Asia (80 per cent) and Latin America and the Caribbean (79 per cent) have the highest share of countries with a comprehensive set of policies  compared with just 33 per cent of countries in both Oceania and in Northern Africa and Western Asia.
 Across the six domains  policies to promote cooperation and partnerships and to facilitate safe  orderly and regular migration are most widespread  with more than three quarters of Governments reporting that they met or fully met the criteria. Migrant rights and their socioeconomic well-being have the lowest proportions of Governments reporting a wide range of policy measures  at 55 per cent and 59 per cent  respectively. 
Percentage of Governments reporting that they met the criteria for having a comprehensive set of policy measures to facilitate orderly  safe  regular and responsible migration and mobility of people  by region  2019 (percentage)
Note: Based on 111 countries with available data (as of 1 September 2019).
        ** Data are available for less than 50 per cent of countries.*** Data are available for less than 50 per cent of countries and for less than 50 per cent of the population.
 Goal 9
  

    Goal 11  
