
Children are subject to various forms of violence  physical punishment and psychological aggression  trafficking and sexual violence.
Violent forms of discipline are widespread  despite their detrimental and often long-lasting impact. Nearly eight in ten children from 1 to 14 years of age were subjected to some form of psychological aggression and/or physical punishment at home in the previous month in 69 (mostly low- and middle-income) countries with available data from 2012 to 2019.
Trafficking of children is a global problem  mostly associated with sexual exploitation  but also forced labour. In 2016  children accounted for almost one third of detected trafficking victims worldwide (23 per cent were girls and 7 per cent were boys). Large areas of impunity for this crime still exist  even though most countries have comprehensive trafficking-in-persons legislation in place. However  the number of convictions has recently started to increase in response to improvements in detection.
Sexual violence  one of the most disturbing violations of childrens rights  is widely underreported. A lack of comparable data also limits understanding of the full extent of the problem. In slightly more than one in four countries with comparable data  at least 5 per cent of women between 18 and 29 years of age reported experiencing sexual violence in childhood.
The impact of COVID-19 on childrens risk of exposure to violence and exploitation due to lockdowns and associated school closures  which have affected the majority of children globally  is still largely unknown. Some countries have seen a surge in reports of violence against children at home. In addition  use of the Internet for remote learning may increase childrens exposure to cyberbullying  risky online behaviour and online predators.
 All of these forms of violence can have devastating and lifelong implications for millions of children worldwide. Urgent actions are needed to advocate for and invest in effective child protection solutions.
