
SDG Goals
 
 
Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development  provide access to justice for all and build effective  accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels

             UN Women/Christopher Herwig
        
 Realizing the goal of peaceful  just and inclusive societies is still a long way off. In recent years  no substantial advances have been made towards ending violence  promoting the rule of law  strengthening institutions at all levels  or increasing access to justice. Millions of people have been deprived of their security  rights and opportunities  while attacks on human rights activists and journalists are holding back development. More countries are ramping up efforts to uncover human rights abuses and designing laws and regulations that foster more open and just societies. But much more work is needed to ensure that these mechanisms are implemented properly. Conflict and other forms of violence are an affront to sustainable development. In 2018  the number of people fleeing war  persecution and conflict exceeded 70 million  the highest level that the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has seen in almost 70 years. All are particularly vulnerable to various forms of abuse  including trafficking  violence and non-inclusive decision-making. Ensuring that they receive adequate protection is paramount to achieving the goal of inclusive societies and sustainable development. 

  Young men are at higher risk of murder overall  while most victims of intimate partner homicide are women
 The global homicide rate was roughly stable at around 6 per 100 000 people over the 20072017 decade  with the highest rates observed in Latin America and the Caribbean. The number of homicide victims increased by 11 per cent  from 419 000 in 2000 to 464 000 in 2017. Over that period  lethal violence was increasingly concentrated in two regions: Latin America and the Caribbean accounted for 34 per cent of global homicides in 2017 (compared to 27 per cent in 2000)  and the share in sub-Saharan Africa grew from 25 to 33 per cent. 
 Men made up around 80 per cent of homicide victims overall  but women constituted the majority (64 per cent) of murder victims in cases of intimate partner/family-related homicide. For intimate partner homicides only  the share of female victims was even higher at 82 per cent. Young men 15 to 29 years old faced the highest homicide risk overall with some regional variations. 
Victims of homicide  by sex  2017 (percentage)
Show Data
Download to CSV

  The majority of trafficking victims are taken for sexual exploitation and forced labour

      In recent years  a growing number of trafficking victims have been detected in countries around the world: from an average of 150 detected victims per country in 2010 to 254 in 2016. The number of reporting countries remained roughly the same (93 in 2010 compared to 97 in 2016). The increase in the average number of detected victims per country may be a sign of stepped-up efforts by authorities to identify victims; alternatively  it could reflect a growing trafficking problem. Contrary to findings from earlier years  most trafficking victims are now detected domestically.
    

      In 2016  adult women comprised nearly half of the detected victims globally  and girls accounted for about 23 per cent. The majority of victims were trafficked for sexual exploitation (about 59 per cent)  and more than a third were trafficked for forced labour. Victim profiles were different depending on the form of exploitation. While 83 per cent of the female victims in 2016 were trafficked for sexual exploitation  82 per cent of the males were trafficked for forced labour.
    
Forms of exploitation among detected trafficking victims  2016 or latest year (percentage)
Note: Estimates are based on data provided by 110 countries reporting 24 687 detected victims.
Show Data
Download to CSV

Birth registration is a human right  yet less than three quarters of children under 5 years of age worldwide are registered

    Birth registration is fundamental to helping people access their individual rights  such as basic social services and legal justice. Yet  less than three quarters (73 per cent) of children under 5 years of age worldwide have had their births registered  according to data from 161 countries over the period 2010 to 2018. Many countries and regions have reached universal or near universal coverage  but in sub-Saharan Africa  fewer than half (46 per cent) of all children under 5 years of age are registered. Central and Southern Asia and South-Eastern Asia also lag behind at 68 per cent and 82 per cent  respectively. Much work has been done recently to improve civil registration systems and to raise awareness among citizens  but continued efforts are needed to ensure that all children can claim their right to an identity.
    
Proportion of children under 5 years whose births have been registered with a civil authority  latest data from 2010 to 2018 (percentage)
Note: Based on 161 countries with global population coverage of 84 per cent. The number of countries with available data is in parentheses. Data for Eastern Asia are not shown due to low population coverage.
Show Data
Download to CSV

Murder rates among human rights defenders  journalists and trade unionists are rising
 From 1 January to 31 October 2018  the United Nations recorded and verified 397 killings of human rights defenders  journalists and trade unionists in 41 countries. Every week  an average of nine people were murdered on the front lines of efforts to build more inclusive and equal societiesa disturbing increase from the average of one victim per day from 2015 to 2017. 
 One in two victims had been working with communities on issues involving land  the environment  poverty  the rights of minorities and indigenous peoples  or the impact of business activities. And  overall  every tenth victim was a woman. Journalists and bloggers constituted one quarter of the total number of victims killed  and most of these murders occurred outside of countries experiencing conflict.
 Unless Member States live up to their international obligation to protect those who stand up for the fundamental rights and freedoms of others  human rights defenders  journalists and trade unionists will continue to be targets of assassination in countries around the world. 
Number of cases of killings of human rights defenders  journalists and trade unionists  by sex  20152018
 Includes only incidents that occurred from 1 January to 31 October 2018. The figure does not include data on cases of kidnapping  forced disappearance  arbitrary detention or torture.
Show Data
Download to CSV

More countries are establishing legal and institutional frameworks for the defence of human rights  but the pace of progress is slow
 Binding laws and policies giving individuals the right to access information held by public authorities have been adopted by 125 countries  with at least 31 countries adopting such laws since 2013. Expert assessments  however  suggest that in many cases  the legal framework could be improved. Among the 123 countries for which data on legal frameworks are available  40 countries do not have adequate provisions on the right to appeal to an independent administrative body  which is considered key for the proper implementation of this right. 
 The pace of progress in establishing national human rights institutions (NHRIs) that are in compliance with the principles relating to the status of national institutions (the Paris Principles) must be accelerated. In 2018  only 39 per cent of all countries had successfully achieved compliance; an increase of 3 per cent (7 countries) from 2015. If growth continues at the same rate  by 2030 only around half of all countries will have compliant NHRIs to ensure that States deliver on their human rights obligations. 
Proportion of countries with human rights institutions that have applied for accreditation  and proportion that are in compliance with the Paris Principles  2018 (percentage)
* Excluding Australia and New Zealand.
Show Data
Download to CSV
 Goal 15
  

    Goal 17  
