

      Bribery is at least five times more likely in low-income than in high-income countries
    
 Corruption is antithetical to sustainable development  aggravating income inequality  reducing domestic and foreign investment  and significantly lowering the quality of public sector services. Yet it is commonplace in many countries to be asked to pay bribes to access essential public services related to health care  education  water  electricity and the justice system. A countrys social and economic development is a key factor in corruption risk. According to the latest available data in more than 120 countries and territories over the period 2011 to 2020  the average prevalence rate of bribery in low-income countries is 37.6 per cent  versus 7.2 per cent in high-income countries. Along with more obvious ramifications  the COVID-19 pandemic has brought unprecedented opportunities for corruption. Addressing corruption will support a more inclusive recovery based on integrity and accountability. 

          Widespread civilian deaths in armed conflicts persist  although progress has been made in most regions
      
Armed conflict results in civilian deaths  injury and trauma  displacement and damaged essential infrastructure  including health care. It is associated with rampant violations of human rights and international humanitarian law  including against children. At least 176 095 civilian deaths were recorded in 12 of the worlds deadliest armed conflicts between 2015 and 2020. Despite this high toll  the annual number of civilian deaths globally actually decreased by 61 per cent over this period. However  in sub-Saharan Africa  civilian deaths in conflicts increased by 66 per cent. The reduction in civilian deaths at the global level is attributable to some of the deadliest conflicts becoming less lethal  along with collective efforts to enhance the protection of civilians. 
In 2020  5 civilians per 100 000 people were killed in armed conflicts  and 1 in 7 of those were women or children. Most civilian deaths were caused by small arms and light weapons (27 per cent) or by heavy weapons and explosive munitions (24 per cent). Throughout 2020  the United Nations has consistently called for a global ceasefire to protect civilians from the deadly combination of armed conflict and COVID-19.
