
 Millions of children around the globe face different forms of exploitation  including trafficking and child labour. The risk to children is increasing due to the combined effects of pandemic-related school closures and economic distress. 
Trafficking in persons is found in every country. Perpetrators engaged in this criminal activity target the marginalized and impoverished  including children. Globally  one in three trafficking victims detected in 2018 were a child; in low-income countries  the share was one half. Girls are primarily victims of sexual exploitation (72 per cent of detected girl victims)  while boys are mainly subjected to forced labour (66 per cent of detected boy victims). Previous economic crises suggest that the sharp increase in adult unemployment rates and an asymmetric global recovery from COVID-19 is likely to increase the risk of trafficking. Therefore  in all countries  investments in job creation for adults and young people of legal working age  along with economic recovery  could reduce risks to children of various forms of exploitation.
Share of detected trafficking victims by sex and age  20042018 (percentage)
Show Data
Download to CSV
Child labour and child trafficking are interrelated. In countries with a larger share of trafficking victims that are children  there is also a higher prevalence of child labour. Global trends point to a rise in child labour for the first time in two decades. At the start of 2020  the number of children engaged in child labour (not including its worst forms  such as children in bonded and forced labour or in commercial sexual exploitation) totalled 160 million (63 million girls and 97 million boys). This translates to almost 1 in 10 children worldwide. Nearly half of children in child labour were engaged in hazardous work (79 million).
The impacts of COVID-19 threaten to push an additional 8.9 million children into child labour by the end of 2022  as families send children out to work in response to job and income losses. Urgently expanding income support and social protection coverage could help offset this rise.
Number of children aged 5 to 17 years engaged in child labour  20122020 and projected to 2022 (millions)
Note: Downside scenario reflects a slippage in social protection coverage due to austerity measures or other factors. Absence of mitigation reflects an increase in poverty due to the absence of additional mitigation measures. Mitigated scenario reflects an increase in social protection coverage.
Show Data
Download to CSV
