
SDG Goals
 
 
Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development

             UNDP
        
 Support for implementing the SDGs is gaining momentum  but major challenges remain. A growing share of the global population has access to the Internet  and a Technology Bank for LDCs has been established  yet the digital divide persists. Personal remittances are at an all-time high  but ODA is declining  and private investment flows are often out of sync with sustainable development. Moreover  global growth has slowed due to ongoing trade tensions  and some governments have retreated from multilateral action. With the stakes so high  strong international cooperation is needed now more than ever to ensure that countries have the means to achieve the SDGs. 

    Despite pledges to boost development financing  aid levels are falling
    
 Net ODA totalled $149 billion in 2018  down by 2.7 per cent in real terms from 2017. The decline was largely due to a reduction in donor country aid for hosting refugees. Aid for bilateral projects  programmes and technical assistance  which represents over half of total net ODA  rose by 1.3 per cent in real terms from 2017 to 2018. Contributions to multilateral organizations  which represent about one third of total net ODA  were stable. Humanitarian aid fell by 8 per cent in real terms. 
 ODA is the largest source of external financing for LDCs. Nevertheless  in 2018  less aid went to LDCs and African countries  where it is needed most. Preliminary figures indicate that bilateral ODA to LDCs fell by 3 per cent in real terms from 2017  and aid to Africa fell by 4 per cent. Donor countries are not living up to their pledge to ramp up development finance  tamping down efforts to achieve global Goals. 

          Components of net ODA flows  20102018 (billions of constant 2017 dollars)
        
* Preliminary data
        
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Effective mobilization of domestic resources  including through taxation  is critical to achieving the SDGs
 The effective mobilization and use of domestic resources  underscored by the principle of national ownership  is vital to achieving the SDGs. Assessing the tax burdenthat is  revenue in the form of taxesis an important fiscal policy exercise with economic and social implications. The average overall rate of taxation among the Group of 20 and other advanced economies was 23 per cent of GDP in 2017  compared to 18 per cent among developing and emerging market economies.
 On average  in 2017  the share of government expenditure funded by taxes was 64 per cent among the Group of 20 and other advanced economies and 61 per cent among emerging market economies. Globally  the slight reduction in the role of taxes in government spendingfrom an average of 64.5 per cent in 2005 to 62.3 per cent in 2017may be attributable to a combination of improved revenue mobilization and public financial management. 
 A well-functioning revenue mobilization system is a prerequisite for strong  sustained and inclusive economic development. However  countries must custom-build the components of such a system and its overarching fiscal framework. 
Share of government expenditure funded by domestic taxes  2005 and 2017 (percentage)
* Excluding Australia and New Zealand.
        
Show Data
Download to CSV

Personal remittances from migrant workers abroad are becoming the largest source of external financing in developing countries
 Total global remittances reached $689 billion in 2018  up from $633 billion in 2017. Remittances to low- and middle-income countries over that period rose by 9.6 per cent  reaching a record high of $529 billion in 2018. That was more than three times the amount of ODA they received in 2018  and was significantly larger than foreign direct investment (if China is excluded). Remittances to low- and middle-income countries are projected to reach $550 billion in 2019  making them the largest source of external financing in these countries. 
 However  the benefits of remittances from international migrant workers are reduced by the high cost of transferring money. In the first quarter of 2019  the average cost of sending $200 was still high  at around 7 per cent. That is more than double the SDG target of 3 per cent by 2030. The cost of money transfers was highest across many African corridors and small islands in the Pacific  at about 10 per cent. 

Trade tensions among the worlds largest economies are reverberating  affecting producers and consumers worldwide
 Decreasing tariffs provide wider access to goods and contribute to a more open trading system. However  ongoing and increasing trade tensions among large economies have adversely affected consumers and producers worldwide and negatively impacted business and financial markets. Those tensions also cast doubt on the future of a sound multilateral trading system under the World Trade Organization.
 In 2017  trade-weighted tariffs decreased to an average of 2.2 per cent worldwide. Large differences were found at the regional level  however  reflecting global economic imbalances. The highest tariff rates in 2017 were applied by sub-Saharan African and LDCs  averaging 7.1 per cent and 7.8 per cent  respectively  of the value of imported merchandise. Those tariffs were significantly higher than those applied by high-income countries (1.2 per cent) as well as developing regions as a whole (3.7 per cent). South-Eastern Asia had an import tariff rate of 1.7 per cent  indicating the regions growing openness to international trade. 

  More than half the worlds population is online; attention must now be directed to the other half
 The Internet can be a gateway to development  and a means of implementation for many of the SDGs. At the end of 2018  more than half the worlds population (3.9 billion people) used the Internetan important step towards a more inclusive global information society. Over 80 per cent of people in developed countries were online in 2018 compared to 45 per cent in developing countries  and only 20 per cent in LDCs. 
 Access to broadband networks is believed to have a significant impact on global economic output. An increase of 1 per cent in fixed broadband penetrationthe number of subscriptions per 100 inhabitantsis associated with a rise of 0.08 per cent in global GDP  on average. The impact is higher in developed countries than in developing countries. Globally  growth in fixed broadband subscriptions has been sustained  with the penetration rate rising from 3.4 per 100 inhabitants in 2005 to 14.1 in 2018. 
Proportion of population using the Internet  by country groupings and globally  2018 (percentage)
Show Data
Download to CSV

    Financial support for statistics has increased  but is still not sufficient to meet demand created by the SDGs
    
 The demand for high-quality  timely and accessible data for development planning is increasing. To meet that demand  countries need to establish a strong national statistical plan that has sufficient funding and political backing to improve statistical capacity across the national statistical system. In 2018  129 countries worldwide had implemented a national statistical plan  up from 102 in 2017. However  many countries lacked the necessary funding to do so. In sub-Saharan Africa  only 23 per cent of plans were fully funded  compared to 94 per cent in Europe and Northern America.
 In 2016  countries received support valued at $623 million from multilateral and bilateral donors for all areas of statistics  up from $591 million in 2015. Such support increased by almost $400 million from 2006 to 2016  yet was still insufficient to satisfy data and statistical demands created by the SDGs. To meet statistical capacitybuilding objectives by 2030  current commitments to statistics 0.33 per cent of total ODAneed to double.
Proportion of countries with national statistical plans  by level of funding  2018 (percentage)
* Excluding Australia and New Zealand.
              Note: Numbers in parentheses reflect the number of countries for which a national statistical plan is under implementation.
            
Show Data
Download to CSV
 Goal 16
  

     Note to the editor
