

Personal remittances from migrant workers abroad are becoming the largest source of external financing in developing countries
 Total global remittances reached $689 billion in 2018  up from $633 billion in 2017. Remittances to low- and middle-income countries over that period rose by 9.6 per cent  reaching a record high of $529 billion in 2018. That was more than three times the amount of ODA they received in 2018  and was significantly larger than foreign direct investment (if China is excluded). Remittances to low- and middle-income countries are projected to reach $550 billion in 2019  making them the largest source of external financing in these countries. 
 However  the benefits of remittances from international migrant workers are reduced by the high cost of transferring money. In the first quarter of 2019  the average cost of sending $200 was still high  at around 7 per cent. That is more than double the SDG target of 3 per cent by 2030. The cost of money transfers was highest across many African corridors and small islands in the Pacific  at about 10 per cent. 

Trade tensions among the worlds largest economies are reverberating  affecting producers and consumers worldwide
 Decreasing tariffs provide wider access to goods and contribute to a more open trading system. However  ongoing and increasing trade tensions among large economies have adversely affected consumers and producers worldwide and negatively impacted business and financial markets. Those tensions also cast doubt on the future of a sound multilateral trading system under the World Trade Organization.
 In 2017  trade-weighted tariffs decreased to an average of 2.2 per cent worldwide. Large differences were found at the regional level  however  reflecting global economic imbalances. The highest tariff rates in 2017 were applied by sub-Saharan African and LDCs  averaging 7.1 per cent and 7.8 per cent  respectively  of the value of imported merchandise. Those tariffs were significantly higher than those applied by high-income countries (1.2 per cent) as well as developing regions as a whole (3.7 per cent). South-Eastern Asia had an import tariff rate of 1.7 per cent  indicating the regions growing openness to international trade. 
