
The voluntary efforts countries are making to reduce national emissions and adapt to the impacts of climate change are described in their nationally determined contributions (NDCs). Each Party to the Paris Agreement is requested to prepare  communicate and maintain successive NDCs that it intends to achieve. As of May 2021  192 Parties had submitted their first NDCs to the Framework Convention on Climate Change secretariat. Moreover  as of December 2020  48 of them were submitted as new or updated NDCs  representing 75 Parties and accounting for 30 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions in 2017. Adaptation information was included in 39 of these 48 new or updated NDCs. Countries are articulating more quantified targets and indicators for adaptation  and identifying links between adaptation  the Sustainable Development Goals and other frameworks. The highest-priority areas for adaptation identified in the NDCs are: food security and production  terrestrial and wetland ecosystems  freshwater resources  human health  and key economic sectors and services. 
An increasing number of countries are also prioritizing the formulation and implementation of national adaptation plans to boost their efforts to adjust to a changing climate. These include building flood defences  setting up early warning systems for cyclones  or switching to drought-resistant crops. As of May 2021  125 of 154 developing countries were in the process of formulating and implementing national adaptation plans  and 22 countries have submitted their plans to the Framework Convention on Climate Change secretariat. Developed countries are stepping up their efforts to provide technical guidance and support to LDCs  which are particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change to develop and carry out such plans.

          Priority areas identified in adaptation components of nationally determined contributions among countries that included adaptation information  2020 (percentage)
        
Show Data
Download to CSV

  DespiThe global transition to a low-emission  climate-resilient future is backed up by increasing financial support
Climate finance provided by developed to developing countries continues to increase  reflecting an ongoing commitment to support the global transition to a low-emission and climate-resilient future. Total climate finance reported by Annex I Parties to the Paris Agreement reached an annual average of $48.7 billion in 20172018. This represents an increase of 10 per cent over 20152016. While over half of all climate-specific financial support for 20172018 was targeted at mitigation  the share of adaptation support is growing  and many countries are prioritizing adaptation in their provision of financial support. 
Two thirds of financial support provided in 20172018 (equivalent to an annual average of $32.3 billion) flowed through bilateral  regional and other channels  while the remaining third was channelled through multilateral institutions and funds  such as the Green Climate Fund (GCF). Support for the formulation of national adaptation plans through the GCF Readiness Programme is steadily increasing in all regions and groups. Eleven developing countries have submitted 23 project proposals to the GCF  of which 7  totalling $464 million  have been approved.
In 20172018  climate-specific support constituted the largest share of total climate finance ($36.2 billion). The share of core/general support (financial support provided to multilateral and bilateral institutions that is not considered climate-specific) has been decreasing over time  from over 40 per cent of the total in 20112012 to roughly 25 per cent in 20172018.

          Total financial support provided  as reported by Annex I Parties to the Framework Convention on Climate Change secretariat  20112018 (billions of dollars)
        
Show Data
Download to CSV
 Goal 12
  

    Goal 14  
