
SDG Goals
 
 
Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts
Climate change is already having a profound and alarming impact worldwide. Global temperatures continued to increase in 2016  setting a new record of about 1.1 degrees Celsius above the pre-industrial period. The extent of global sea ice fell to 4.14 million square kilometres in 2016  the second lowest on record. Atmospheric CO2 levels reached 400 parts per million. Drought conditions predominated across much of the globe  influenced by the El Nio phenomenon. In addition to rising sea levels and global temperatures  extreme weather events are becoming more common and natural habitats such as coral reefs are declining. These changes affect people everywhere  but disproportionately harm the poorest and the most vulnerable. Concerted action is urgently needed to stem climate change and strengthen resilience to pervasive and ever-increasing climate-related hazards.
Photo Credit :  UN Photo/UNICEF/Marco Dormino

  Countries commitment to taking climate action is gaining momentum  as indicated by the early entry into force of the Paris Agreement

      The landmark Paris Agreement brings nations together to strengthen the response to climate change. It aims to keep the global temperature rise this century to well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and as close as possible to 1.5 degrees  while building countries resilience to the adverse effects of climate change. The Agreement entered into force on 4 November 2016  marking a shift in focus towards implementation. It also signals the commitment of nations to take action for the climate and sustainable development  translating the goals of the Paris Agreement into actionable strategies and shifting global financial flows onto lowcarbon  climate-resilient pathways. As of 7 June 2017  148 parties had ratified the Paris Agreement. In parallel with the Agreement  a push to develop and implement initiatives to enhance financial flows  technologies and capacity-building efforts to support developing and most vulnerable countries is underway.
    

      Parties to the Paris Agreement are expected to prepare  communicate and maintain successive nationally determined contributions (NDCs). NDCs highlight climate-related targets  policies and actions planned in response to climate change. Countries NDCs relayed so far reveal linkages across all SDGs. They outline development approaches and actions aimed at lowering greenhouse gas emissions and building climate resilience. The NDCs show that governments are integrating climate action into socio-economic development strategies  since both are integral to sustainable development. As of 7 June 2017  142 Parties (141 countries plus the European Commission) had communicated their first NDCs to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Secretariat (UNFCCC).
    

          Number of Parties that have ratified the Paris Agreement  number of Parties that have submitted NDCs and total number of Parties to the UNFCCC  June 2017
          
Note: Oceania* refers to Oceania excluding Australia and New Zealand.
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Countries are preparing and implementing national plans to adapt to climate change and enhance resilience

      The national adaptation plan (NAP) process is designed to help developing countries identify their medium- and long-term needs for adaptation to the effects of climate change  and to formulate and implement strategies and programmes to address those needs. It is a continuous  progressive and iterative process with a country-driven  gender-sensitive  participatory and fully transparent approach. Implementation helps countries reduce their vulnerability to the impacts of climate change by building adaptive capacity and resilience  and by integrating climate change adaptation into development planning processes and strategies. As of 7 June 2017  seven countries had completed and submitted the first iteration of their NAP; the process in many other countries is under way. Progress is expected to accelerate with support from the Green Climate Fund  which is mandated to provide expedited support to LDCs and other developing countries in the formulation and implementation of NAPs.
    

          Number of developing countries that have undertaken specific measures to lay the groundwork for and address gaps in formulating and implementing national adaptation plans (NAPs)  2017
        

           Note: The seven measures listed in the chart correspond to the first measures included in Element A of the process to formulate and implement NAPs. Subsequent elements include preparatory elements (Element B)  implementation strategies (Element C)  and reporting  monitoring and review (Element D). Non-LDCs refers to developing country Parties that are not least developed countries.
        
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Disaster risk reduction has the potential to reduce the rising toll of human lives from smaller-scale events

      Between 1990 and 2015  more than 1.6 million people died in internationally reported natural hazards  and the trend is moving upward. Since mortality is often concentrated in very intensive disasters  it is difficult to perceive trends over relatively short periods of time. However  data on smaller-scale disasters show a statistically significant trend towards increasing mortality in events with fewer than 100 deaths. A similar study taking into consideration population growth also showed an upward trend. Disaster mortality reflects not only exposure to hazards  but also a confluence of other vulnerability factors  such as poor urban management  environmental degradation  lack of disaster preparedness  and poverty and inequality. Moreover  these underlying risk factors are responsible for most morbidity resulting from natural hazards  and tend to affect low-income households and communities and small businesses disproportionally. The data suggest that an increased focus on disaster risk reduction is a prudent investment for saving lives.
    

          Total number of deaths from natural hazards (geological and hydrometerological events) resulting in fewer than 100 deaths  1990-2013
        

          Note: Geological events include earthquakes  mass movement (dry) and volcanic activity. Hydrometeorological events include floods  storms  landslides  extreme temperatures  drought and wildfire.
        
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Disaster risks are magnified by poverty  inequality  environmental degradation and poor urban planning

      Reducing risks associated with natural hazards requires a comprehensive approach that prevents new risk  minimizes existing risk  and strengthens economic  social  health and environmental resilience. Over the last decade  countries have made progress in managing the worst impacts of disasters  mainly by developing institutions and policies for disaster risk reduction and strengthening capacity for disaster preparedness  response and early warning. That said  progress has been limited in tackling the underlying drivers of disaster riskpoverty  poor urban planning and land use  weak environmental and resource management  and climate change. Countries have thus begun implementing national and local disaster risk reduction strategies that also address these risk factors. Of 96 countries that reported data  all used environmental impact assessments as a mechanism to address such factors. However  only 51 countries used payment for ecosystem services as a mechanism  which is known to promote better land management and the protection of ecological services.
    

          Number of countries with mechanisms for reducing underlying disaster risk factors  2014-2015
        

          Note: Based on data reported by 96 countries.
        
Show Data
Download to CSV
 Goal 12
  

    Goal 14  
