

    Climate change is humanitys code red warning  impacting across the Sustainable Development Goals
  
Human activity has irrefutably caused warming of the climate  at a rate unprecedented in the last 2 000 years  according to the IPCC. Its Sixth Assessment Report signals an urgent code red warning for humanity and outlines what the world can expect if global temperatures rise 1.5 C or higher.

      Disasters and extreme weather events
    
Every region across the globe is already experiencing weather and climate extremes. As the planet warms  scientists anticipate increases in the frequency and intensity of heatwaves  flooding  precipitation  droughts and cyclones. If current trends continue  the UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction project that medium- to large-scale disaster events could reach 560 a year  an average of 1.5 a day  by 2030  a 40 per cent increase from 2015. The IPCC projects that about one third of global land areas will suffer at least moderate drought by 2100. With every additional increment of global warming  the projected changes in extremes will become larger. For instance  children under age 10 today are expected to experience a nearly fourfold increase in extreme weather events by 2100 under a 1.5 C scenario and a fivefold increase under a 3 C scenario.

      Oceans
    
Sea levels have already risen faster than in any preceding century. Projections show that sea level could rise 30 to 60 centimetres by 2100  even if greenhouse gas emissions are sharply reduced and global warming is limited to well below 2 C. A rising sea level would lead to more frequent and severe coastal flooding and erosion. Ocean warming will also continue with increasingly intense and frequent marine heatwaves  ocean acidification and reduced oxygen. About 70 to 90 per cent of warm-water coral reefs will disappear even if the 1.5 C threshold is reached; they would die off completely at the 2 C level. These impacts are expected to occur at least throughout the rest of this century  threatening marine ecosystems and the more than 3 billion people who rely on the ocean for their livelihoods. 

      Biodiversity
    
Even before the full fury of climate change has been unleashed  biodiversity loss is accelerating. Further losses in terrestrial  ocean and coastal systems are expected  with varying severity depending
on the temperature threshold reached. For instance  endemic species in biodiversity hotspots face a very high extinction risk  which will double if the global average mean temperature rises 1.5 C to 2 C  but will increase tenfold at 1.5 C to 3 C. Declining ecosystems and biodiversity loss will affect nature-based services  threatening human health and our very survival. These conditions also increase opportunities for the emergence of new zoonotic diseases  such as COVID-19  and possible future pandemics.

      Agriculture and food systems
    
The droughts  floods and heatwaves brought on by climate change are putting added pressure on food production in many regions of the world. Parts of Africa and Central and South America are already experiencing increased  sometimes acute  food insecurity and malnutrition due to floods and droughts. Other projected impacts include devitalized soils  increased pest infestations and disease as well as weakened ecosystem services  such as pollination.

      Vulnerable populations
    
Climate change is affecting everyone  but the most vulnerable are hardest hit. The IPCC report estimates that 3.3 billion to 3.6 billion people live in contexts that are highly vulnerable to climate change. Hotspots of high human vulnerability are concentrated in small island developing States  the Arctic  Southern Asia  Central and South America  and much of sub-Saharan Africa. Poverty  limited access to basic services  conflict and weak governance limit adaptability to climate change  resulting in humanitarian crises that could displace millions from their homes. By 2030  an estimated 700 million people will be at risk of displacement by drought alone.

      Climate action now
    
According to the latest IPCC report  The scientific evidence is unequivocal: climate change is a threat to human well-being and the health of the planet. Any further delay in concerted global action will miss a brief and rapidly closing window to secure a livable future. The report calls for urgent climate action now.
