

      The landmark Paris Agreement brings nations together to strengthen the response to climate change. It aims to keep the global temperature rise this century to well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels and as close as possible to 1.5 degrees  while building countries resilience to the adverse effects of climate change. The Agreement entered into force on 4 November 2016  marking a shift in focus towards implementation. It also signals the commitment of nations to take action for the climate and sustainable development  translating the goals of the Paris Agreement into actionable strategies and shifting global financial flows onto lowcarbon  climate-resilient pathways. As of 7 June 2017  148 parties had ratified the Paris Agreement. In parallel with the Agreement  a push to develop and implement initiatives to enhance financial flows  technologies and capacity-building efforts to support developing and most vulnerable countries is underway.
    

      Parties to the Paris Agreement are expected to prepare  communicate and maintain successive nationally determined contributions (NDCs). NDCs highlight climate-related targets  policies and actions planned in response to climate change. Countries NDCs relayed so far reveal linkages across all SDGs. They outline development approaches and actions aimed at lowering greenhouse gas emissions and building climate resilience. The NDCs show that governments are integrating climate action into socio-economic development strategies  since both are integral to sustainable development. As of 7 June 2017  142 Parties (141 countries plus the European Commission) had communicated their first NDCs to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Secretariat (UNFCCC).
    

          Number of Parties that have ratified the Paris Agreement  number of Parties that have submitted NDCs and total number of Parties to the UNFCCC  June 2017
          
Note: Oceania* refers to Oceania excluding Australia and New Zealand.
Show Data
Download to CSV
