
 The world's wetlands are being lost at an alarming rate; it's time to protect and restore them on a massive scale  
Wetlands are considered the most biologically diverse of all ecosystems and are breeding grounds for 40 per cent of the world's plant and animal species. Unsustainable use and inappropriate management of wetlands not only result in the loss of ecosystem services but can also pose direct risks  including disease. Moreover  the degradation of wetlands releases stored carbon  fuelling climate change. Over the past 300 years  over 85 per cent of the planet's wetlands have been lost  mainly through drainage and land conversion  with many remaining wetland areas degraded. Since 1970  81 per cent of species dependent on inland wetlands have declined faster than those relying on other biomes  and an increasing number are facing extinction. 
Other water-related ecosystems across the planet  such as lakes  rivers and reservoirs  are also changing rapidly. One in five river basins have experienced high (i.e.  above natural) fluctuations in surface water over the past five years. Population growth  changes to land cover and land use  and climate change are key drivers of these changes. Urgent efforts are needed to protect them and to prevent further degradation of these precious biological habitats. 
Early remediation of water pollution will require active monitoring  which is sorely lacking in the poorest countries
Improving water quality is essential to protecting human and ecosystem health. Assessments in 2020 of rivers  lakes and aquifers in 97 countries showed that 60 per cent of water was of good ambient quality. However  of the 76 000 water bodies assessed  only 1 per cent were in the poorest countries. For at least 3 billion people  the quality of the water they rely upon is unknown due to the lack of monitoring. Data are also lacking on groundwater  which often represents the largest share of freshwater in a country. Out of all reporting countries  only around 60 per cent included information about groundwater.
Agricultural and untreated wastewater pose two of the gravest threats to environmental water quality globally since they release excess nutrients into rivers  lakes and aquifers  damaging ecosystem function. Accelerated progress is needed to enhance farming management practices and improve wastewater treatment rates to protect freshwater quality  especially in regions with high population growth  such as Africa. With a well-developed monitoring system  water-quality issues could be identified at an early stage  allowing mitigation measures to be introduced before severe deterioration occurs.
