
SDG Goals
 
 
Make cities and human settlements inclusive  safe  resilient and sustainable

             The World Bank/Curt Carnemark
        
Over 90 per cent of COVID-19 cases are occurring in urban areas. The pandemic is hitting the most vulnerable the hardest  including the 1 billion residents of the worlds densely populated informal settlements and slums. Even before the new coronavirus  rapid urbanization meant that 4 billion people in the worlds cities faced worsening air pollution  inadequate infrastructure and services  and unplanned urban sprawl. Safe public transportation  reliable basic services and open public spaces are especially important now to ensure the health and livelihoods of urban dwellers. Successful examples of containing COVID-19 demonstrate the remarkable resilience and adaptability of urban communities in adjusting to new norms. Cities will emerge from the pandemic  but whether they are prepared for the next crisis will depend on how much they can advance data-driven inclusive and sustainable urban development.

  Global progress has been reversed in reducing the share of slum dwellers  whose vulnerability has been intensified by the pandemic
The impacts of COVID-19 are exacerbating the vulnerability of slum dwellers and those living in informal settlements. Many of these urban residents already suffer from inadequate housing with limited or no access to basic infrastructure and services  including water  sanitation and waste management. Overcrowding of public transportation and limited health-care facilities have had a catastrophic effect on these communities  turning them into epicentres within epicentres. Many urban dwellers in the developing world work in the informal sector and are at high risk of losing their livelihoods as cities lock down.
Concerted efforts by national governments  city authorities and other stakeholders led to a significant decline in the proportion of the urban population living in slums  from 28 per cent in 2000 to 23 per cent in 2014. Alarmingly  that trend has reversed as rapid urbanization outpaces the development of housing  infrastructure and services. The proportion of the urban population living in slums rose to 24 per cent in 2018  or over 1 billion people  due to increases in Northern Africa and Western Asia and sub-Saharan Africa.
Changes in the proportion of urban population living in slums in developing countries  2000 to 2014 and 2014 to 2018 (percentage)
* Excludes Australia and New Zealand.
Show Data
Download to CSV

  More public transport is needed in the worlds cities
Reliable  accessible and affordable public transportation reduces pollution and traffic and promotes productivity and inclusion. Only half the worlds urban population has convenient access to public transportation  according to 2019 data from 610 cities in 95 countries. Access is measured as the share of the population within 500 metres walking distance of low-capacity transport systems (buses and trams) and 1 000 metres distance to high-capacity systems (trains  subways and ferries). In addition  many cities have a high prevalence of informal transport systems  which are often deficient in terms of regularity and safety. A focus on short-term investments in road-based public transport infrastructure can translate into higher access to low-capacity public transport systems.
While the pandemic is ongoing  cities may need to introduce additional safety measures to mitigate the elevated risk of coronavirus transmission in crowded public transport. Global data illustrate the need to enhance access to public transport systems that are well integrated with walking and cycling paths through long-term mobility plans and targeted investments.
Proportion of urban population with convenient access to public transport  2019 (percentage)
Show Data
Download to CSV

Beyond the devastation  the pandemic has prompted a positive rethinking of our cities
How we plan and develop our urban areas  infuse infrastructure and services  mitigate risks and respond to the needs of growing populations determines the long-term prosperity of cities and their people. Over the period 1990 to 2015  most urban areas recorded a general increase in the amount of built-up area per person  that is  the physical expansion of cities was faster than their rates of population growth  according to 2019 data from a representative global sample of 755 cities from 95 countries. In some cities  this rapid expansion reflects unplanned urban sprawl  making the delivery of services more costly and inefficient. On average  all regions except for sub-Saharan Africa and Eastern and South-Eastern Asia recorded a consistent increase in the built-up area per capita.
The pandemic has made it clear that urban planning is crucial for better public health and for mitigating peoples vulnerabilities to other hazards  such as natural disasters. As of May 2020  154 countries have some form of national urban plan. Many national and city governments are now revisiting those plans to help prevent the next pandemic.
Built-up area per capita  2000 and 2015 (square metres per person)
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Open public spaces in the world's cities promote health and productivity  but access is often limited
With cities on lockdown  open public spaces are even more in demand. As with public transport  equitable access to open and public spaces contributes to enhanced productivity and health. In particular  open spaces as places of commerce are critical to the informal economy  which many people depend on for their livelihoods.
The share of land allocated to streets and open spaces averaged only about 16 per cent globally  according to 2019 data from 610 cities in 95 countries. Of this combined share  streets accounted for about three times as much urban land as open public spaces  such as parks and riverfronts. In terms of access  the share of the population that can access open public spaces (within 400 metres walking distance along a street network) averaged 46.7 per cent. Wide disparities in access are observed across regions  ranging from 26.8 per cent in Eastern and South-Eastern Asia to 78 per cent in Australia and New Zealand. Within countries  smaller cities consistently recorded higher levels of access than large cities.
Proportion of population within 400 metres walking distance to open public spaces  2019 (percentage)
Show Data
Download to CSV

  Clearer skies over some of the worlds most polluted cities provide a glimpse of what could be
In 2016  9 in 10 people living in urban areas worldwide were breathing air that did not meet the World Health Organization air quality guidelines value for particulate matter (PM2.5). That same year  more than half the worlds urban population was exposed to air pollution levels at least 2.5 times above that value. Half the worlds urban population also experienced an increase in particulate matter and a worsening of air quality from 2010 to 2016.
Globally  ambient air pollution is estimated to have caused 4.2 million premature deaths in 2016. In some cities  the lockdowns in response to COVID-19 have significantly lowered certain air pollutants due to the closing of factories and the reduction in the number of cars on the road. However  that improvement is likely to be only a temporary reprieve from a long-term unhealthy situation. Once the lockdowns ease  air pollution will climb back to pre-pandemic levels  as already demonstrated in some countries. It is entirely possible that these levels may worsen due to the relaxation or lifting of environmental laws and standards during the pandemic or during the post-pandemic phase to stimulate economic growth. Together  the United Nations and Governments have a major role to play in ensuring that does not happen.
 Goal 10
  

    Goal 12  
